PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

Implicit Attitude Generalization
Occurs Immediately; Explicit
Attitude Generalization Takes
Time
Kate A. Ranganath and Brian A. Nosek
University of Virginia

ABSTRACT—People are able to explicitly resist using knowl-

edge about one person to evaluate another person from the
same group. After learning about positive and negative
behaviors performed by one individual from each of two
different groups, participants were introduced brieﬂy to
new individuals from the groups. Implicit evaluations of
the original individuals readily generalized to the new
individuals; explicitly, participants resisted such generalization. Days later, both implicit and explicit evaluations
of the original individuals generalized to the new individuals. The results suggest that associative links (e.g.,
shared group membership) are sufﬁcient for implicit attitude generalization, but deliberative logic (e.g., individual
group members are not necessarily the same) can reduce
explicit generalization by association. When knowledge
distinguishing who did what is unavailable, such as after
forgetting, associative knowledge provides the basis of
explicit evaluation. We conclude that a simple association
linking one individual to another can produce implicit
attitude generalization immediately and explicit attitude
generalization eventually.
Moral intuition and legal theory indicate that it is unacceptable
to judge a person on the basis of the actions of another. Ancient
and modern jurisprudence reject the notion of guilt by association (see Banaji & Bhaskar, 2000). Individuals are not deliberately punished for the crimes of others who share the same
group membership—whether the group is deﬁned by kinship,

Address correspondence to Kate Ranganath, Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, PO Box 400400, Charlottesville, VA
22904, e-mail: ranganath@virginia.edu.

Volume 19—Number 3

friendship, or social category. Nevertheless, everyday thinking
and judging provide occasions for evaluative generalization in
which the actions of one individual are used in evaluating another.
Crawford, Sherman, and Hamilton (2002) demonstrated that
transferring the traits perceived about one individual to another
group member depends on perceived group entitativity—the
extent to which a collection of individuals is perceived as being
a uniﬁed entity (Campbell, 1958). Participants were given
positive or negative information about an individual group
member and were then given an opportunity to apply that information to other group members (or not). The key manipulation
was whether the group to which the individuals belonged was
described as having high entitativity (similar people with shared
background, attitudes, and personalities) or low entitativity
(diverse people with different backgrounds, attitudes, and personalities). When the group was perceived as being highly entitative, participants transferred traits from one group member to
another. But when the social group was thought to be large and
diverse, participants recognized that one individual is not representative of all group members and resisted generalizing their
attitude from one person to another person in the same group.
A nuanced understanding of group diversity overrides a more
basic relation—that individuals are associated by simply belonging to the same group. To avoid using evaluations of one
person in judging another requires a deliberate judgment that
group association is not a sufﬁcient basis for generalization.
Despite the conscious thought involved in resisting attitude
generalization, the mental presence of a group association might
be sufﬁcient for observers to generalize even when they have no
intention of doing so. In other words, even when attitude generalization is explicitly resisted, associations between group
members may still exist and lead to generalization anyway.

Copyright
r 2008 Association
for Psychological
Science
Downloaded
from pss.sagepub.com
at Bobst Library,
New York University
on April 19, 2016

249

Attitude Generalization

THE SUBTLE INFLUENCE OF ASSOCIATIVE
RELATIONS

A variety of modern dual-process models suggest that qualitatively distinct cognitive processes are involved in social evaluation. Gawronski and Bodenhausen (2006) and other researchers (Sloman, 1996; Smith & DeCoster, 2000; Strack & Deutsch,
2004) have suggested that both associative and propositional
processes contribute to evaluation. Associative evaluations are
activated automatically when a person encounters a relevant
stimulus. Propositional processes, in contrast, inﬂuence deliberate, reﬂective decisions that involve the manipulation of
symbolically represented rules. Gawronski and Bodenhausen
have further proposed that the most important distinction between associative and propositional reasoning is that associative
relations can be activated regardless of whether a person believes those associations are accurate or inaccurate, whereas
propositional processes allow for the deliberation involved in
conscious declarations of truth or falsity.
For example, according to classical and modern conceptions
of cognitive balance, if one learns that Oscar has many negative
characteristics and then learns that Elmo belongs to the same
group that Oscar belongs to, Elmo should become associated
with negativity because of his association with Oscar (Greenwald et al., 2002; Heider, 1958). However, consciously applying
propositional logic that Oscar’s actions should not reﬂect on
Elmo should inhibit associative transference. Deliberation allows for the rejection of the associative generalization and for
Elmo to be judged on his own merits. Recent work showing the
distinctiveness of implicit (associative) and explicit (deliberative)
evaluations provides evidence that people can possess multiple evaluations of a single target—even evaluations they would
reject as false if given the opportunity to deliberate (Greenwald
& Banaji, 1995; Nosek, 2007).
In the present study, participants read about behaviors performed by two individuals who belonged to distinct, heterogeneous groups. One individual performed mostly negative behaviors, and the other performed mostly positive behaviors. Immediately after reading about these two individuals, participants
were introduced brieﬂy to two new individuals from the same
groups. We predicted that the induced evaluations of the original
individuals would generalize to the new individuals associatively, as measured by the Implicit Association Test (IAT;
Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998), but that participants
would resist generalizing from the original to the new individuals when given the opportunity to deliberate via self-reported
evaluations.
RESOURCES PREVENTING GENERALIZATION FADE
WITH TIME

The existing studies showing that people resist generalizing
attitudes from one person to another have typically measured

250

evaluations immediately after an attitude induction. Observers
in these circumstances have ample resources with which to deliberate and prevent generalization. In particular, clear memory
for who did what is necessary for observers to keep their evaluations straight and enables them to prevent the actions of one
individual from inﬂuencing their judgments of another.
With time, however, the details that maintain clear distinctions between the behaviors of different individuals are forgotten
(Johnson, Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993). Brainerd and Reyna’s
fuzzy-trace theory, for example, distinguishes between gist
memory (memory for the general meaning of informational inputs) and verbatim memory (more exact representation of the
speciﬁc content of informational inputs; Reyna & Brainerd,
1995). According to this theory, verbatim memory is forgotten
and becomes inaccessible quickly, leaving people to rely on gist
memory (Clark & Clark, 1977).
The quicker loss of verbatim memory relative to gist memory
suggests that, over time, the speciﬁc information used to deliberately distinguish group members will fade. If the associations between group members still exist in memory without the
conscious individuating information, then the passage of time
should increase the difﬁculty of avoiding associative generalization from one person to another. To test this possibility, we
reassessed implicit and explicit evaluations toward the novel
individuals days after the induction. We expected that participants would be able to resist explicit (but not implicit) generalization when tested immediately, but that they would not be
able to explicitly resist generalization following a delay. Thus,
we predicted that after the delay, both implicit and explicit
evaluations of the original individuals would generalize to the
new individuals.
STUDY OVERVIEW

The study took place in two sessions. In the ﬁrst session, participants read about behaviors performed by two individuals, Reemolap and Vabbenif (adapted from Gregg, 2000), each of whom
was described as belonging to a large and diverse social group
(low in entitativity). One of the individuals performed primarily
positive behaviors, and the other performed primarily negative
behaviors. Next, participants read brief introductions to two new
individuals, Bosaalap and Ibbonif, who belonged to the same
social groups as the original individuals. The information about
the new individuals was minimal, and pretesting showed it to be
relatively neutral. We then used the IAT and semantic differential
ratings to measure participants’ implicit and explicit attitudes,
respectively, toward either the original individuals or the new
individuals. We manipulated the individuals to be evaluated
between participants so that the act of reporting attitudes toward
one pair would not inﬂuence reports of attitudes toward the other.
The IAT is widely used to measure conditioned associations
(Baccus, Baldwin, & Packer, 2004; Gregg, Seibt, & Banaji, 2006;
Olson & Fazio, 2001; Rydell, McConnell, Mackie, & Strain,

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 3

Kate A. Ranganath and Brian A. Nosek

2006), and, because of its demonstrated reliability and sensitivity,
it was particularly useful for assessing associations in this study
(for a review of the psychometric properties of the IAT, see Nosek,
Greenwald, & Banaji, 2007).
We predicted that people would explicitly refrain from using
the information about the original group members in making
immediate judgments of the new group members; this ﬁnding
would replicate demonstrations that people can recognize that
one individual’s behavior is not representative of all group
members if their group is large and diverse (Crawford et al.,
2002; McConnell, Sherman, & Hamilton, 1997). In contrast, we
predicted that implicit attitudes toward the new individuals
would be as strong as if the new individuals were the targets of
the original induction. That is, we expected the induced evaluations of the original individuals to immediately transfer associatively to the new individuals as a consequence of their
shared group membership.
Three days after the ﬁrst study session, we invited participants
to return to complete the implicit and explicit attitude measures
again. We hypothesized that days after the initial learning episode,
participants would show not only the implicit attitude generalization predicted for the ﬁrst session, but also full explicit
attitude generalization. That is, after the delay, we expected the
attitudes induced toward the original individuals to provide the
basis for explicitly evaluating the new individuals.

METHOD

Participants
Participants were volunteers at the Project Implicit research
Web site (https://implicit.harvard.edu). They were randomly
assigned to this study, which was part of an available pool of
approximately 100 studies. At the end of the ﬁrst session, participants were asked if they were willing to be contacted again
for a follow-up session. Of the 831 people who participated in
both sessions, 684 (82%) completed all of the study materials.1
For more information about this virtual laboratory, see Nosek
(2005) and Nosek et al. (2007).
1
Participants who completed the second session were slightly older (M 5
36.15 years, SD 5 12.86) than those who did not (M 5 32.54 years, SD 5
12.56), t(1681) 5 4.88, prep 5 .98, d 5 0.12. Also, the percentage of women was
signiﬁcantly higher in the group who completed the second session (71%) than
in the group who did not complete that session (62%), t(1679) 5 4.26, prep 5
.98, d 5 0.11. On a scale ranging from 3 (very liberal) to 3 (very conservative),
those participants who completed the second session were signiﬁcantly more
liberal (M 5 1.17, SD 5 1.62) than those who did not (M 5 0.67, SD 5
1.72). However, there were no signiﬁcant differences in substantive effects in
the ﬁrst session when we compared participants who did and who did not
complete the second session: Implicit attitudes did not differ signiﬁcantly, F(1,
1654) 5 1.80, prep 5 .74, d 5 0.04, and neither did explicit attitudes, F(1,
1652) 5 0.02, prep 5 .20, d 5 0.0005. Because results in the ﬁrst session did
not differ between the two groups, and because one of our primary hypotheses
concerned differences in immediate and delayed attitude transfer, in this article
we present results for those participants who completed both sessions.

Volume 19—Number 3

Measures
IAT (Greenwald et al., 1998)
The IAT assesses associations among two concept categories
(e.g., Reemolap and Vabbenif) and two evaluative attributes
(e.g., good and bad, the attributes used in this study) by requiring that participants categorize stimulus items representing
the four categories as quickly as possible using two keys of a
computer keyboard. Participants used the ‘‘e’’ and ‘‘i’’ keys to
classify items one at a time into the corresponding superordinate
categories identiﬁed on the right or left side of the screen. At
each session, participants completed an IAT for either the
original people or the new people.
The IATs consisted of seven blocks of trials, following the
recommendation of Nosek, Greenwald, and Banaji (2005). We
analyzed the response latencies using the D algorithm (Greenwald, Nosek, & Banaji, 2003). Response latency was calculated
from the beginning of the trial until the time of a correct response, and latencies less than 400 ms were removed. A positive
D score indicates an implicit preference consistent with the
attitude induction—that is, a preference for the individual who
was associated with positive information (original-people condition) or a preference for the new individual who belonged to
the same group as the original person associated with positive
information (new-people condition).
Self-Report Measures
At each session, explicit attitudes were measured with 8-point
semantic differential ratings for either the original individuals or
the new individuals. The following traits were rated: unintelligent-intelligent, unpopular-popular, unlikeable-likeable, unfriendly-friendly, and unpleasant-pleasant. Participants also
reported their global liking for each of the individuals (‘‘How
much do you like . . . ?’’) on a 7-point scale ranging from dislike
very much to like very much. Reliability among ratings was high
(Cronbach’s a 5 .89), so they were averaged into a single rating
for each individual.
Manipulation Check
At the end of the ﬁrst session, participants were asked to identify
the four individuals to whom they were introduced by matching
names and pictures. Two percent of participants failed this manipulation check. The substantive results were unchanged when
these participants were excluded from analysis.

Procedure
First Session
The attitude-induction procedure was designed to create a clear
preference for one individual over the other. Participants viewed
a series of sentences describing behaviors performed by Reemolap and Vabbenif. Each sentence was accompanied by a

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

251

Attitude Generalization

picture of the individual, counterbalanced across participants,
who performed that behavior. Reemolap performed predominantly positive behaviors (12 positive, 4 negative), and Vabbenif
performed predominantly negative behaviors (12 negative, 4
positive). The name-behavior pairs were adapted from Hamilton
and Gifford (1976; e.g., Reemolap visited a sick friend in the
hospital, and Vabbenif parked in a space reserved for the
handicapped). Each name-behavior pair appeared on a computer
screen for 3 s. The induction procedure took approximately
3 min.
Next, participants were introduced to the new people. Bosaalap
and Ibbonif were described as belonging to the same groups as
Reemolap and Vabbenif—Laapians and Nifﬁans, respectively.
Both groups were described as diverse groups with many members who perform all different types of behaviors. The information
distinguishing the new individuals consisted of a cartoon picture
showing both and these descriptions:
Ibbonif is a sculptor and very much enjoys gardening, biking, and
playing card games. Ibbonif is kind and thoughtful, but tends to be
slightly greedy at times.
Bosaalap is a painter and very much enjoys cooking, hiking, and
listening to music. Bosaalap is warm and considerate, but tends to
be slightly dishonest at times.

In pretesting, these descriptions were judged to be evaluatively equivalent. The cartoon images of the original and new
individuals had a general resemblance consistent with the group
memberships. Picture-description pairings were randomized
across participants and did not affect the results.
Finally, participants were randomly assigned to complete the
implicit and explicit attitude measures about either the original
people (Reemolap and Vabbenif) or the new people (Bosaalap
and Ibbonif). The order of the implicit and explicit measures was
randomized across participants and did not inﬂuence the results.
Second Session
At the end of the ﬁrst session, 92% of participants indicated
their willingness to be contacted by e-mail for a follow-up session. These participants were e-mailed a link to the follow-up
session 3 days later (days between sessions: M 5 10, SD 5 7,
Mdn 5 6, mode 5 5). The length of time between the ﬁrst and
second sessions did not moderate any results.
Participants were randomly assigned to complete the implicit
and explicit attitude measures toward either the original people
or the new people. Thus, roughly half the participants completed
the attitude measures for the same people at the ﬁrst and second
sessions, and the other half completed the attitude measures for
different people at the two sessions. Whether they completed
attitude measures for the same or different people at the ﬁrst and
second sessions did not qualify the results.

252

RESULTS

Attitudes Were Induced
Self-reported attitudes toward the original people, the targets of
the attitude induction, were in a direction consistent with the
induction materials. The individual who performed primarily
positive behaviors (M 5 4.26, SD 5 1.03) was explicitly preferred over the individual who performed primarily negative
behaviors (M 5 3.66, SD 5 0.97), t(291) 5 11.46, prep 5 .99,
Cohen’s d 5 0.65. Implicit attitudes toward the original people
were also consistent with the induction materials. The individual who performed primarily positive behaviors was implicitly
preferred over the individual who performed primarily negative
behaviors (M 5 0.07, SD 5 0.42), t(291) 5 3.02, prep 5 .98, d 5
0.17.

Explicitly, Generalization Was Resisted; Implicitly,
Evaluations Generalized to New Individuals
Participants resisted using information about one individual in
their immediate explicit evaluations of another individual from
the same group. The attitude induction had a signiﬁcantly stronger effect on self-reported attitudes toward the original people,
the targets of the induction, than on self-reported attitudes toward the new people (the mean difference between the attitudes
toward the person who performed primarily positive behaviors
and the person who performed primarily negative behaviors was
0.60, SD 5 1.72, for the original people and 0.36, SD 5 1.15, for
the new people), t(566) 5 5.72, prep 5 .99, d 5 0.25.
Notably, explicit attitude generalization was not entirely
avoided. If there had been no generalization of induced attitudes, we would have observed no preference. However, attitudes toward the new individuals did show a preference consistent with what was learned about their fellow group members;
that is, participants preferred the new individual who belonged
to the same group as the original person who performed primarily positive behaviors (M 5 4.44, SD 5 0.79) over the new
individual who belonged to the same group as the original person
who performed primarily negative behaviors (M 5 4.09, SD 5
0.80), t(277) 5 5.17, prep 5 .99, d 5 0.29. One factor that may
have prevented complete resistance to generalization was that
attitudes toward the original and new individuals were measured
between participants, which reduced the opportunity for participants to deliberately distinguish their attitudes toward the
new people from their attitudes toward the original people.
Nonetheless, participants explicitly resisted generalization; the
effect of the attitude induction on the explicit ratings was 70%
smaller for the new people than for the original people.
The induced implicit attitudes toward the original people generalized completely to the new people. The new individual who
shared group membership with the original person who performed primarily positive behaviors was implicitly preferred
over the new individual who shared group membership with the

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 3

Kate A. Ranganath and Brian A. Nosek

original person who performed primarily negative behaviors
(M 5 0.08, SD 5 0.45), t(273) 5 2.88, prep 5 .98, d 5 0.18. There
was no difference between the effectiveness of the induction on
attitudes toward the original people (M 5 0.07, SD 5 0.42) and
attitudes toward the new people (M 5 0.08, SD 5 0.45), t(562) 5
0.11, prep 5 .18, d 5 0.004, even though the new individuals
were not involved in the induction procedure. Participants were
unable to prevent the information about the original individuals
from inﬂuencing their implicit responses toward the new individuals. They automatically and immediately treated the individual group members as if they were interchangeable.
Induced Attitudes Persisted Over Time
At the second session, self-reported attitudes toward the original
people, the targets of the attitude induction, continued to show a
preference consistent with the induction materials. The individual who performed primarily positive behaviors (M 5 4.15,
SD 5 0.93) was preferred over the individual who performed
primarily negative behaviors (M 5 3.71, SD 5 0.90), t(273) 5
5.56, prep 5 .98, d 5 0.34. Implicit attitudes toward the original
people also persisted over time. The individual who performed
primarily positive behavior was implicitly preferred over the
individual who performed primarily negative behaviors (M 5
0.08, SD 5 0.46), t(273) 5 2.82, prep 5 .97, d 5 0.17.
Implicit and Explicit Attitudes Generalized After a Delay
Recall that when explicit attitudes were measured immediately
after training, participants resisted transferring their evaluative
knowledge of one individual to another from the same group. At
the second session, however, self-reported attitudes toward the
original people generalized completely to the new people. The
new person who shared group membership with the original
person who performed primarily positive behaviors (M 5 4.17,
SD 5 0.93) was preferred over the new person who shared group
membership with the original person who performed primarily
negative behaviors (M 5 3.72, SD 5 0.90), t(288) 5 6.58, prep 5
.98, d 5 0.39. There was no difference between the effectiveness
of the induction on evaluations of the original and new individuals (the mean difference between the attitudes toward the
person who performed primarily positive behaviors and the
person who performed primarily negative behaviors was 0.45,
SD 5 1.46, for the original people and 0.40, SD 5 1.36, for the
new people), t(559) 5 0.24, prep 5 .28, d 5 0.01.
Also, the generalized implicit attitudes that were induced
immediately persisted over time. At the second testing session,
the implicit preference between the new people showed an effect
consistent with the induction materials describing the original
people (M 5 0.12, SD 5 0.46), t(566) 5 4.36, prep 5 .99, d 5
0.26. Again, there was no difference between the effectiveness
of the induction on evaluations of the original (M 5 0.08, SD 5
0.46) and new (M 5 0.12, SD 5 0.46) individuals, t(566) 5
1.03, prep 5 .64, d 5 0.04.

Volume 19—Number 3

Finally, the correlation between implicit and explicit attitudes
was signiﬁcantly stronger at the delayed test (r 5 .28) than at the
immediate test (r 5 .16), Z 5 2.31, prep 5 .96. This ﬁnding is
consistent with our prediction that implicit associations would
have a stronger inﬂuence on explicit judgment as the details of
the induction faded in memory.
DISCUSSION

Even when people deliberately resist using the behaviors of one
individual to make explicit judgments about another individual
from the same group, the simple association due to shared group
membership is sufﬁcient for implicit evaluations of one group
member to generalize to another. Further, generalization occurs
even explicitly when evaluations are measured days after the
original induction. Despite participants’ ability to consciously
resist using group information as a basis of evaluation immediately, associations between group members still exist in
memory and inﬂuence evaluation as time passes.
Balance principles predict that if one person who is viewed
negatively is associated with a second person by group membership, then the second person is likely to inherit the negative
evaluation (Greenwald et al., 2002; Heider, 1958). We assume
that resisting transferring attitudes from one person to another
requires the ability to differentiate distinct knowledge about
group members and the cognitive capacity to deliberately refrain from generalization. As information individuating two
group members fades, resisting generalization becomes more
difﬁcult. As suggested by fuzzy-trace theory (Reyna & Brainerd,
1995), the details that distinguish knowledge about one group
member from knowledge about another are forgotten, leaving
conscious evaluation reliant only on the associations that are
available in memory.
Like the other studies that have used the IAT to measure
conditioned associations, ours rests on the assumption that the
IAT measures associations (see also Greenwald, Nosek, Banaji, &
Klauer, 2005). Rothermund and Wentura (2004) argued that the
IAT may be inﬂuenced by salience asymmetries as well. However,
it is unlikely that our conditioning paradigm induced salience
asymmetries because we used novel groups and presented the
same amount of information about each individual. The only
difference between the individuals was that one was associated
with positive behaviors and the other with negative behaviors.
The present results inspire a host of new questions concerning
boundary conditions and variables that may moderate the inﬂuence of associative generalization on evaluation. For example, explicit generalization across individuals within a group
should increase as a function of perceived similarity, but does
implicit generalization occur even following trivial means of
associating individuals? Also, this paradigm might be adapted
to investigate when individuating or generalizing processes will
dominate, and under what conditions automatic processes will
lead to generalization despite conscious intentions otherwise.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

253

Attitude Generalization

The present work suggests that associative processes inﬂuence
propositional processes in social evaluation and is a signiﬁcant
step in specifying the importance of associative relationships.
Even if people believe that it is unacceptable to judge people
on the basis of the actions of others, associative relations provide
a subtle means of inducing guilt or accolade by association.
This research demonstrated immediate and automatic evaluation of little-known social targets based on evaluations of associated individuals. An encounter with one member of a group
can have lasting effects on evaluations of other members of the
same group. In social judgment, generalizing evaluations from
one person to others provides a simple heuristic for assessment. However, the potential cost is that individuating information that would enable more accurate assessment may be missed
because of a propensity to generalize qualities that group
members may not hold in common.
Acknowledgments—We would like to thank Tony Greenwald,
Lee Hendricks, Colin Tucker Smith, and the Implicit Cognition
Lab at the University of Virginia for their helpful comments. We
would also like to thank Jeff Hansen for his technical expertise
and David Hamilton for his generosity in sharing study materials. This research was supported by a grant from the National
Institute of Mental Health (R01 MH68447) to Brian Nosek.
REFERENCES
Baccus, J.R., Baldwin, M.W., & Packer, D.J. (2004). Increasing implicit self-esteem through classical conditioning. Psychological
Science, 15, 498–502.
Banaji, M.R., & Bhaskar, R. (2000). Implicit stereotypes and memory:
The bounded rationality of social beliefs. In D.L. Schacter & E.
Scarry (Eds.), Memory, brain, and belief (pp. 139–175). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Campbell, D.T. (1958). Common fate, similarity, and other indices of
the status of aggregates of persons as social entities. Behavioral
Science, 3, 14–25.
Clark, H.H., & Clark, E.V. (1977). Psychology and language. New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Crawford, M.T., Sherman, S.J., & Hamilton, D.L. (2002). Perceived
entitativity, stereotype formation, and the interchangeability of
group members. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
83, 1076–1094.
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G.V. (2006). Associative and propositional
processes in evaluation: An integrative review of implicit and
explicit attitude change. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 692–731.
Greenwald, A.G., & Banaji, M.R. (1995). Implicit social cognition:
Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes. Psychological Review,
102, 4–27.
Greenwald, A.G., Banaji, M.R., Rudman, L.A., Farnham, S.D., Nosek,
B.A., & Mellott, D.S. (2002). A uniﬁed theory of implicit attitudes, stereotypes, self-esteem, and self-concept. Psychological
Review, 109, 3–25.
Greenwald, A.G., McGhee, D.E., & Schwartz, J.K.L. (1998). Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition: The Implicit
Association Test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
74, 1464–1480.

254

Greenwald, A.G., Nosek, B.A., & Banaji, M.R. (2003). Understanding
and using the Implicit Association Test: I. An improved scoring
algorithm. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85,
197–216.
Greenwald, A.G., Nosek, B.A., Banaji, M.R., & Klauer, K. (2005).
Validity of the salience asymmetry interpretation of the Implicit
Association Test: Comment on Rothermund and Wentura (2004).
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 134, 420–425.
Gregg, A.P. (2000). The hare and the tortoise: The origins and dynamics
of implicit and explicit attitudes. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
Gregg, A.P., Seibt, B., & Banaji, M.A. (2006). Easier done than undone: Asymmetry in the malleability of automatic preferences.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 1–20.
Hamilton, D.L., & Gifford, R.K. (1976). Illusory correlation in interpersonal perception: A cognitive basis of stereotypic judgments.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 12, 392–407.
Heider, F. (1958). Interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley.
Johnson, M.K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D.S. (1993). Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 3–28.
McConnell, A.R., Sherman, S.J., & Hamilton, D.L. (1997). Target
entitativity: Implications for information processing about individual and group targets. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 72, 750–762.
Nosek, B.A. (2005). Moderators of the relationship between implicit
and explicit evaluation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 134, 565–584.
Nosek, B.A. (2007). Implicit-explicit relations. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 16, 65–69.
Nosek, B.A., Greenwald, A.G., & Banaji, M.R. (2005). Understanding
and using the Implicit Association Test: II. Method variables and
construct validity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
31, 166–180.
Nosek, B.A., Greenwald, A.G., & Banaji, M.R. (2007). The Implicit
Association Test at age 7: A methodological and conceptual review. In J.A. Bargh (Ed.), Social psychology and the unconscious:
The automaticity of higher mental processes (pp. 265–292). New
York: Psychology Press.
Olson, M.A., & Fazio, R.H. (2001). Implicit attitude formation through
classical conditioning. Psychological Science, 12, 413–417.
Reyna, V.F., & Brainerd, C.J. (1995). Fuzzy trace theory: An interim
synthesis. Learning and Individual Differences, 7, 1–75.
Rothermund, K., & Wentura, D. (2004). Underlying processes in the
Implicit Association Test (IAT): Dissociating salience from associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133,
139–165.
Rydell, R.J., McConnell, A.R., Mackie, D.M., & Strain, L.M. (2006).
Of two minds: Forming and changing valence-inconsistent implicit and explicit attitudes. Psychological Science, 17, 954–958.
Sloman, S.A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3–22.
Smith, E.R., & DeCoster, J. (2000). Dual-process models in social and
cognitive psychology: Conceptual integration and links to underlying memory systems. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 4, 108–131.
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Reﬂective and impulsive determinants of social behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 220–247.

(RECEIVED 3/20/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 8/7/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 3

