Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2007, Vol. 33, No. 2, 263–273

Copyright 2007 by the American Psychological Association
0278-7393/07/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.33.2.263

Adaptive Memory: Survival Processing Enhances Retention
James S. Nairne, Sarah R. Thompson, and Josefa N. S. Pandeirada

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Purdue University
The authors investigated the idea that memory systems might have evolved to help us remember
fitness-relevant information—specifically, information relevant to survival. In 4 incidental learning
experiments, people were asked to rate common nouns for their survival relevance (e.g., in securing food,
water, or protection from predators); in control conditions, the same words were rated for pleasantness,
relevance to moving to a foreign land, or personal relevance. In surprise retention tests, participants
consistently showed the best memory when words were rated for survival; the survival advantage held
across recall, recognition, and for both within-subject and between-subjects designs. These findings
suggest that memory systems are “tuned” to remember information that is processed for fitness, perhaps
as a result of survival advantages accrued in the past.
Keywords: memory, evolution, recall, survival, adaptation

detect cheaters (Cosmides, 1989), prospective mating partners
(Schmitt, 2005), or predators (Barrett, 2005). One of the defining
characteristics of these hypothesized modules is domain specificity—that is, each module has been sculpted by nature to accomplish some specific end. Nature usually steers away from domaingeneral solutions (e.g., cognitive processes that are insensitive to
content) because the adaptive problems that drive selection are
usually quite specific (see Tooby & Cosmides, 1992).
Unfortunately, it is notoriously difficult to identify adaptations,
and scholars continue to argue about the proper defining characteristics (see Andrews, Gangestad, & Matthews, 2002). Moreover,
a psychological process can be highly adaptive and related to an
important adaptive problem faced by our ancestors but, in fact,
may have evolved for some other function. So-called exaptations
evolved for one use but are co-opted to perform additional adaptive ends (Gould & Vrba, 1982). The proximate mechanisms that
allow us to read and write could not have evolved for those ends,
although reading and writing achieve many adaptive results. Attempting to identify and catalogue adaptations is a dangerous
business and fraught with difficulties, even though we may be
reasonably certain that cognitive adaptations do exist.
It does seem likely that our memory systems evolved to help us
remember certain kinds of information better than others. From a
fitness perspective, not all stimuli are created equal; in most
instances, it is more important for an organism to remember the
appearance of a predator or the location of food than to remember
some other random occurrence. Studies have shown that people
and other animals do find it easier to associate certain kinds of
stimuli, such as snakes or spiders, to fear-inducing stimuli, such as
shock (see Öhman & Mineka, 2001). If nature “tuned” our memory systems to process and remember fitness-relevant information—that is, information that could help us find needed nourishment, protect ourselves from predators, or secure a mate—then,
perhaps, our ancestors would have been more likely to survive and
pass along their genetic record.
The present experiments were designed to explore this idea,
although we do not firmly commit ourselves to an adaptationist
program (Gould & Lewontin, 1979). Rather, our experiments were

Why did our memory systems evolve? Do the functional properties of memory mirror selection pressures from our ancestral
past? Memory researchers rarely address such questions, choosing
to focus instead on the proximate mechanisms that guide mnemonic phenomena (Bruce, 1985; Glenberg, 1997; Nairne, 2005).
Most scholars acknowledge that memory is adaptive, but the role
that particular adaptive problems may have played in shaping or
tuning mnemonic processes remains largely, although not completely, unexplored.
Anderson and Schooler (1991, 2000) suggested that certain
mnemonic characteristics, such as the general form of the retention
function, mimic the way events tend to occur and recur in the
environment. Our memory systems, as a consequence, may be
optimally designed to reflect statistical structure in the environment—we forget an item with time because that item is less likely
to occur again and be needed in the same way. Kareev (2000) has
argued that fundamental capacity limits in immediate or working
memory—the ubiquitous seven (plus or minus two)—maximize
our ability to detect causality by forcing us to focus on small
samples of information. Silverman and Eals (1992) have suggested
that women may be better equipped than men to remember the
locations of objects set in fixed domains because of how labor was
divided during early environments of adaptation.
Evolutionary psychologists assign tremendous importance to
ancestral environments, arguing that our brains contain numerous
adaptations, realized in the form of processing modules, that are
dedicated to helping us solve specific problems that arose in our
ancestral past (Tooby & Cosmides, 2005, 1992). For example, we
may possess specialized processing machinery for helping us

James S. Nairne, Sarah R. Thompson, and Josefa N. S. Pandeirada,
Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University.
Josefa N. S. Pandeirada was supported by Portuguese Foundation for
Science and Technology Fellowship SFRH/BPD/21534/2005. We thank
David Ceo for many helpful comments during the course of this research.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to James S.
Nairne, Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47907. E-mail: nairne@psych.purdue.edu
263

NAIRNE, THOMPSON, AND PANDEIRADA

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

264

functionally motivated and directed at a simple empirical question:
What are the mnemonic consequences of processing information
in terms of its ultimate survival value? Over the years, psychologists have identified a host of processing strategies that effectively
enhance retention (e.g., imaginal or semantic processing), but little
consideration has been given to their ultimate functional value
(although see Paivio, 2007). Why should a memory system show
special sensitivity to the formation of a visual image? Researchers
address possible proximate mechanisms—imagery induces multiple mnemonic codes or simply more elaboration— but leave the
functional questions unaddressed (see Nairne, 2005). In the current
case, our research was motivated by an a priori prediction (based
on an evolutionary analysis) that retention should show sensitivity
to the fitness content of information.
It is possible to address this question empirically in several
ways. One could attempt to identify stimuli that seem inherently
related to fitness (e.g., foodstuffs or predators) and assess their
mnemonic value relative to control stimuli that have been equated
on other relevant dimensions. An alternative approach, the one
adopted here, is to assess how well stimuli are remembered when
they are processed (or not) in terms of their fitness value—in this
case, their relevance to a survival scenario. This second approach
follows closely in the tradition of levels of processing research
wherein one seeks to explore how the quality of processing affects
retention (e.g., Craik & Tulving, 1975). Our intuition was that
examining survival processing, rather than the inherent characteristics of stimuli, would be a more productive route because the
survival value of a stimulus may well depend on the particular
context in which that stimulus is processed. To the extent that an
item is processed in terms of its survival relevance, we expected it
to be remembered well, much like the accessing of meaning aids
retention relative to shallow forms of processing. Adopting a
processing approach also enabled us to assess retention differences
using exactly the same set of to-be-remembered stimuli across
conditions.
In four incidental learning experiments, participants were asked
to make judgments about the relevance of words to a survival
scenario; they were then given a surprise retention test for the rated
words and performance was compared with a variety of control
tasks. It is well known that semantic processing yields significantly
better retention than structural or surface processing, at least when
standard explicit tests such as recall or recognition are used. Given
that a survival analysis presumably requires meaningful processing
(i.e., it is a deep processing task), we were careful to compare
performance with other established semantic or deep processing
tasks. Our expectation was that processing for survival would be a
particularly effective mnemonic strategy.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants were asked to rate 30 unrelated
words in one of three conditions. In the survival condition, words
were rated as relevant or irrelevant to a survival scenario. Each
participant was asked to imagine that he or she was stranded in the
grasslands of a foreign land, without basic survival materials; the
task was to rate how relevant each word might be to finding steady
supplies of food and water and protection from predators. In the
first control condition (moving), participants were asked to imagine they were planning to move to a new home in a foreign land;

their task was to rate the relevance of each word to locating and
purchasing a home and transporting their belongings. We assumed
that this task would induce meaningful processing as well as tap
into an established schema that was highly self-relevant but not
particularly survival relevant. In the final condition (pleasantness),
we used a standard deep processing control: Participants were
asked simply to rate the pleasantness of each presented word. After
completing the rating task and after a short distraction period (digit
recall), participants were given a surprise free-recall test for the
rated words.

Method
Participants and apparatus. One hundred and fifty Purdue
undergraduates participated in exchange for partial credit in an
introductory psychology course. Participants were tested individually in sessions lasting approximately 30 min. Stimuli were
presented and controlled by personal computers.
Materials and design. Stimulus materials were drawn from the
updated Battig and Montague norms (Van Overschelde, Rawson,
& Dunlosky, 2004) and consisted of 30 typical members drawn
from 30 unique categories (for a complete listing of all the materials, see the Appendix). A simple between-subjects design was
used: All participants were asked to rate the same words, presented
in the same random ordering, in one of the three rating scenarios
(n ⫽ 50 in each group). The rating task was followed immediately
by a short digit-recall task prior to a final unexpected free-recall
task. Except for the rating scenario, all aspects of the design,
including timing, were held constant across participants.
Procedure. On arrival in the laboratory, participants were randomly assigned to one of three rating scenarios with the following
instructions:
Survival. In this task, we would like you to imagine that you
are stranded in the grasslands of a foreign land, without any basic
survival materials. Over the next few months, you’ll need to find
steady supplies of food and water and protect yourself from
predators. We are going to show you a list of words, and we would
like you to rate how relevant each of these words would be for you
in this survival situation. Some of the words may be relevant and
others may not—it’s up to you to decide.
Moving. In this task, we would like you to imagine that you
are planning to move to a new home in a foreign land. Over the
next few months, you’ll need to locate and purchase a new home
and transport your belongings. We are going to show you a list of
words, and we would like you to rate how relevant each of these
words would be for you in accomplishing this task. Some of the
words may be relevant and others may not—it’s up to you to
decide.
Pleasantness. In this task, we are going to show you a list of
words, and we would like you to rate the pleasantness of each
word. Some of the words may be pleasant and others may not—it’s
up to you to decide.
Stimuli were presented individually (centered on the screen) for
5 s each, and participants were asked to rate the words on a 5-point
scale, with 1 indicating totally irrelevant (or unpleasant) and 5
signifying extremely relevant (or pleasant). The rating responses
were displayed just below the presented stimulus, and participants
responded by clicking on their value of choice. Everyone was
cautioned to respond within the 5-s presentation window, and no

SURVIVAL PROCESSING ENHANCES RETENTION

mention was made of a later retention test. A short practice session
containing five to-be-rated words preceded the actual rating task.
After the last word was rated, instructions appeared for the
digit-recall task. For this task, seven digits ranging between zero
and nine were presented sequentially for 1 s each, and participants
were required to recall the digits in order by typing responses into
a text box. The digit-recall task proceeded for approximately 2
min. Recall instructions then appeared. Participants were instructed to write down the earlier rated words, in any order, on a
response sheet. The final recall phase proceeded for 10 min.

The significance level for all of the statistical comparisons was
set at p ⬍ .05. Participants had little difficulty providing the
relevant ratings for the individual stimuli within the allotted time.
Ratings were provided for over 99% of the presented words, and
the number of unrated words (no response within 5 s) did not differ
significantly across the groups. Because of the small number of
unrated trials and to avoid item selection problems, we left the
retention data described below unconditionalized.
The data of main interest are shown in the left panel of Figure
1, which presents average proportion correct recall for the three
rating conditions. An overall analysis of variance (ANOVA) on
these data revealed a significant effect of condition, F(2, 147) ⫽
6.89, MSE ⫽ .014, ␩2p ⫽ .09. Consistent with the evolutionary–
functional hypothesis, survival-based processing yielded the best
subsequent retention. A Tukey honestly significant difference test
confirmed that the survival group performed significantly better
than both the moving and the pleasantness groups; the latter two
did not differ significantly.
It is also of interest to ask whether words rated as highly
relevant to survival were remembered better than words rated as
less relevant. To the extent that memory is sensitive to fitness
content, one might expect such an outcome. Indeed, participants
were more likely to recall items given a high survival relevance
rating—in fact, retention increased monotonically with average
rating, F(4, 180) ⫽ 9.94, MSE ⫽ .053, ␩2p ⫽ .18, with recall
averaging .47 for items given a relevance rating of 1 and averaging
.72 for items given a rating of 5. However, because rating is a
quasi-experimental variable, this pattern needs to be interpreted
with some caution. There are item-selection concerns (highly rated

0.70

5

Free Recall

items could differ from other items along any number of uncontrolled dimensions), and, as noted below, the advantage of the
relevant words could be interpreted as a kind of congruity effect.
The middle panel of Figure 1 shows the average ratings given by
participants in each of the three groups. The rating data are
important because the overall survival advantage, as well as any
rating effects seen within a group, could be mediated by a congruity effect (Schulman, 1974). Levels-of-processing research has
shown that people remember stimuli given “yes” responses to
orienting questions better than stimuli given “no” responses, presumably because stimuli given “yes” responses fit more snugly
into the retrieval structure engendered by the orienting task (e.g.,
Craik & Tulving, 1975; Moscovitch & Craik, 1976). If the average
relevance ratings for the survival group exceeded those for, say,
the moving group (i.e., our pool of words was considered more
relevant to survival than to moving), then the survival advantage
could be attributed to more congruous query-target encodings.
However, as the data in Figure 1 clearly show, average ratings
were highest for the pleasantness condition and did not differ
between the survival and moving conditions. An ANOVA revealed
a significant effect of group, F(2, 147) ⫽ 34.95, MSE ⫽ .151, ␩2p
⫽ .32; post hoc tests revealed no difference between survival and
moving and both were significantly below the pleasantness condition.
It is also possible that survival decisions are more difficult or
effortful than moving or pleasantness decisions. Although effort is
typically a poor determinant of retention, relative to the quality of
the processing, relevant data are shown in the panel on the right
side of Figure 1. Average response times for the ratings are shown
for each group. An ANOVA again showed a significant effect of
group, F(2, 147) ⫽ 6.73, MSE ⫽ 121,305.7, ␩2p ⫽ .08. Response
times for survival ratings were the slowest numerically but did not
differ statistically from response times in the moving condition.
Pleasantness ratings were fastest and differed significantly from
survival. When indexed by response times, effortful processing
fails to explain the patterns found in the retention data.
We also examined extralist intrusions in recall. Intrusions are
potentially interesting because they can be used as one index of
schematic or categorical processing. If people are relying on an
established retrieval structure to generate recall candidates, such as
members of a category or a well-defined schema, then one might

3000

Rating

Response Time

Response Time (ms)

0.65
4
0.60

Rating

Proportion Correct

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Results and Discussion

265

0.55

3

0.50
2

2500

2000

0.45
1

0.40

Survival

Moving Pleasantness

1500

Survival

Moving Pleasantness

Survival

Moving Pleasantness

Figure 1. Average proportion correct recall, average rating, and average response time sorted by condition for
Experiment 1 (error bars indicate 95% confidence interval).

NAIRNE, THOMPSON, AND PANDEIRADA

expect to see relatively more intrusions or false recalls (Reyna &
Brainerd, 1995; Roediger & McDermott, 1995). A survival advantage could have occurred because people are using some kind of
survival schema to encode or retrieve information effectively. The
relevant data are shown in Figure 2. An ANOVA revealed a
significant effect of group, F(2, 147) ⫽ 4.88, MSE ⫽ 1.49, ␩2p ⫽
.06; a Tukey honestly significant difference test confirmed that
more intrusions occurred in the survival and moving groups than in
the pleasantness condition, but the former did not differ significantly from each other. Consequently, survival processing may
have led to schematic processing (more so than in the pleasantness
condition), but the intrusion data suggest comparable amounts of
schematic processing occurred in the survival and moving conditions.
The results of Experiment 1 show a clear mnemonic advantage
for survival processing, despite the fact that all three rating conditions presumably induced a deep level of processing. From an
evolutionary perspective, of course, it is reasonable to propose that
our memory systems might be tuned or biased to remember information that is relevant to survival. In the present case, we did not
examine the mnemonic value of fitness-relevance per se, but we
instead examined active survival processing; to-be-recalled information remained the same across the groups. Thinking about
words in terms of their ultimate survival value enhanced retention
relative to a standard deep processing control (pleasantness) and to
a processing task that presumably enabled the use of an established
schema (moving). Our remaining experiments were designed to
replicate and extend this basic finding.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to replicate the first experiment
using a within-subject design. Extending the phenomenon in such
a way has several benefits. Besides replication, some mnemonic
phenomena, such as the generation effect and the word-frequency
effect, depend on whether a within-subject or between-subjects
design is used (e.g., DeLosh & McDaniel, 1996; Nairne, Riegler,
& Serra, 1991). In addition, within-subject designs help to control
for participant-level effects, such as an unequal distribution of
participant characteristics across groups. Within-subject designs

1.6

Average Intrusions

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

266

also enable one to measure the size and consistency of an effect
(e.g., a retention advantage for survival over moving) across individual participants.
In separate blocks of trials, participants were asked to rate the
relevance of unrelated words to a survival and moving scenario;
the rating task was followed by an unexpected free-recall test.
Moving seemed a more appropriate control than pleasantness
given that the intrusion data from Experiment 1 suggested that
schema-based processing may occur in both the moving and survival conditions.

Method
Participants and apparatus. Thirty-eight Purdue undergraduates participated in exchange for partial credit in an introductory
psychology course. Participants were tested individually in sessions lasting approximately 30 min. Stimuli were presented and
controlled by personal computers.
Materials and design. Participants rated 32 target words in
four blocks of 8 words apiece. The 30 words from Experiment
1 were used again, along with 2 additional words sharing the
same general characteristics; as in Experiment 1, all participants received the same stimuli presented in the same random
order. The design was within-subject; participants rated 16
words using the survival scenario (S) and 16 words using the
moving scenario (M). Rating condition was blocked in trials of
8 words in the form SMSM or MSMS. Half of the participants
received each version, ensuring that each word was rated under
both scenarios.
Procedure. All procedural details from Experiment 1 were
replicated in Experiment 2, including timing and rating instructions. At the beginning of the session, participants received general
instructions informing them that they would be required to rate
words according to particular scenarios. At the beginning of each
block, either the survival or moving instructions appeared; a short
practice session, containing three words, was included at the
beginning of the first and second blocks to ensure that everyone
understood the two rating scenarios. Following the fourth block,
participants completed 2 min of digit recall and then received the
surprise free-recall instructions. Participants were allowed 10 min
to recall the words in any order.

Results and Discussion

1.2

0.8

0.4

0.0

Survival

Moving Pleasantness

Figure 2. Average number of intrusion responses sorted by condition in
Experiment 1 (error bars indicate 95% confidence interval).

Once again, participants had little trouble rating words within
the allotted time; rating omissions occurred on fewer than 2% of
the trials, and no significant differences were found between the
two rating scenarios.
The final free-recall data are shown on the left side of Figure 3.
As in Experiment 1, there was a significant recall advantage for
words rated under the survival scenario, F(1, 37) ⫽ 16.34, MSE ⫽
.01, ␩2p ⫽ .31. Because a within-subject design was used (as noted
earlier), we could assess survival–moving recall differences for
each participant: Out of 38 people, 27 recalled more words rated
for survival than moving, 6 recalled more moving words, and there
were 5 with tied scores. The middle and right panels of Figure 3
show the average relevance ratings and response times for the two
rating scenarios. Replicating Experiment 1, there were no significant differences between the two conditions in average relevance

SURVIVAL PROCESSING ENHANCES RETENTION
0.70

5

Free recall

3000

Rating

267
Response Time

Response Time (ms)

4
0.60
Rating

Proportion Correct

0.65

0.55

3

0.50
2

2500

2000

0.45

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

0.40

Survival

Moving

1

Survival

Moving

1500

Survival

Moving

Figure 3. Average proportion correct recall, average rating, and average response time sorted by condition for
Experiment 2 (error bars indicate 95% confidence interval).

ratings, F(1, 37) ⫽ 3.22, MSE ⫽ .155, ␩2p ⫽ .08, or response times,
F(1, 37) ⬍ 1.00, ␩2p ⬍ .02.
Experiment 2 replicated the survival retention advantage of
Experiment 1 using a within-subject design. Again, in a withinsubject design, the participant acts as his or her own control, so
condition differences are not easily attributable to individual or
group characteristics. Instead, it appears as if processing for
survival yields a genuine retention advantage, at least compared
with moving and pleasantness control conditions.

Experiment 3
Having established a survival advantage in the first two experiments using free recall, Experiment 3 examined the effect in
recognition memory. Once again, we used a within-subject design,
which was modeled after Experiment 2 except that retention was
assessed with a recognition test. Although there is no reason to
anticipate that the enhancing effects of survival processing should
be restricted to recall, dissociations between recall and recognition
are relatively common in the memory literature (e.g., Balota &
Neely, 1980).

Method
Participants and apparatus. Forty Purdue undergraduates participated for partial course credit. People were tested in individual
sessions; stimuli were presented and controlled by personal computers.
Materials and design. A pool of 128 words was selected from
the Clark and Paivio (2004) norms. The words were divided into
four groups of 32, matched for imagery, familiarity, and frequency. Two of the groups served as to-be-rated target words
(survival and moving); the remaining 64 words were used as
distractors in the recognition test. Across participants, the word
groups were rotated through the various conditions, serving as
survival, moving, and distractor items. The design was modeled
after Experiment 2, except that participants rated 32 words using
the survival scenario (S) and 32 words using the moving scenario
(M). Rating condition was blocked in trials of 16 words in the form
SMSM or MSMS. The self-paced recognition test followed 10 min
of digit recall.

Procedure. The general procedure from Experiment 2 was
used again in Experiment 3, except for the recognition test. For this
test, participants made recognition judgments for 128 words by
clicking on buttons labeled “old” or “new,” which were displayed
in the center of the computer screen just below the individually
presented test word. Distractor and target words were randomly
ordered; all participants received the same recognition test. Participants were given as much time as needed to make a recognition
decision.

Results and Discussion
Rating responses were supplied over 99% of the time, and no
significant difference was found in the number of rated words
between the survival and moving conditions.
The left panel of Figure 4 shows the mean proportion of
target items given an “old” response for the survival and moving conditions; the average false alarm rate was .15. Performance was quite high, with hit rates exceeding 90% in both
conditions, despite the relative increase in the number of target
stimuli and length of the digit recall task. However, the survival
advantage remained intact, F(1, 39) ⫽ 8.04, MSE ⫽ .002, ␩2p ⫽
.17, and, as in Experiment 2, it was consistent across participants. Out of the 40 participants, 26 recognized more survival
words than moving words correctly, 7 showed the opposite
pattern, and there were 7 with tied scores. In an effort to obtain
a bit more sensitivity, we also separated the participants into
high and low performers; that is, we did a median split based on
the overall recognition score. There was a highly significant
survival advantage for both the high and low performing participants, but, unfortunately, performance for the low performers was still quite high: survival ⫽ .92, moving ⫽ .87.
The middle and right panels of Figure 4 show the average
relevance ratings and the rating response times for the survival
and moving conditions. Unlike in Experiments 1 and 2, average
relevance ratings were significantly higher in the survival condition, F(1, 39) ⫽ 33.41, MSE ⫽ .096, ␩2p ⫽ .46, thus, the
retention advantage might be attributable to a congruity effect
in this instance. To check on this possibility, we conditionalized
the recognition data on the various rating responses; specifically, we examined survival-moving differences for words

NAIRNE, THOMPSON, AND PANDEIRADA
5

Recognition

0.95

0.90

3

2

0.85

0.80

1

Survival

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

3000

Rating

4

Rating

Proportion Correct

1.00

Response Time (ms)

268

Moving

Response Time

2500

2000

1500

Survival

Moving

Survival

Moving

Figure 4. Proportion hits, average rating, and average response time sorted by condition for Experiment 3
(error bars indicate 95% confidence interval).

given each of the five possible rating responses.1 Those data are
shown in Table 1; an ANOVA revealed a significant main effect
of condition, F(1, 33) ⫽ 4.88, MSE ⫽ .017, ␩2p ⫽ .13, no main
effect for rating, F(3.2, 105.8) ⫽ 1.44, MSE ⫽ .014, ␩2p ⫽ .04,
and no significant interaction, F(3.2, 104.2) ⬍ 1, ␩2p ⫽ .02.
Thus, when rating response is equated across conditions, controlling for the congruency problem, the survival advantage
remains. It is interesting that there was no main effect of rating
in this instance. Words rated as highly relevant to survival were
not better recognized than words rated as irrelevant, although,
as noted earlier, this particular comparison is confounded by
item-selection concerns (among other things). Finally, there
was no significant difference in rating response time between
the two conditions, F(1, 39) ⬍ 1, ␩2p ⬍ .01.
Experiment 3 confirms that the survival advantage remains
when recognition is used as the retention measure. Numerically,
the size of the survival advantage was somewhat smaller than in
the previous two experiments but was consistent across participants. Performance was near ceiling in the recognition test for both
the survival and moving conditions, so we are unable to draw
conclusions about the extent to which the advantage interacts with
the nature of the retention test. But the overall results are certainly
consistent with the evolutionary–functional reasoning outlined in
the introduction: Processing items in terms of their ultimate survival value enhances later retention.

Experiment 4
As noted throughout, it is reasonable to assume that processing
words in terms of their survival relevance is a form of deep or
Table 1
Proportion Hits Sorted by Condition and Rating for
Experiment 3
Survival

Moving

Rating

n

M

SD

n

M

SD

1
2
3
4
5

38
39
39
40
40

.93
.95
.95
.97
.94

.10
.15
.10
.06
.10

40
39
40
39
39

.93
.90
.92
.92
.90

.10
.19
.10
.16
.16

meaningful processing. As a consequence, we were careful to
compare survival processing with control conditions that also
required meaningful processing and, in the case of the moving
scenario, schematic processing as well. In Experiment 4, we compared survival processing with yet another control condition, one
that is widely considered to be among the most effective of
encoding techniques: self-reference (see Symons & Johnson, 1997,
for a meta-analytic review).
The self-reference effect refers to the enhancement in retention
that is found when people relate to-be-remembered information to
themselves (e.g., “does the word describe you?”). Some researchers have claimed that the self acts as a kind of superordinate
schema that substantially facilitates encoding and/or subsequent
retrieval (e.g., Rogers, Kuiper, & Kirker, 1977). Challis, Velichkovsky, and Craik (1996) compared self-reference with a variety
of orienting tasks and found that it yielded the best retention in
virtually every case; for example, participants recalled significantly more words following self-referent encoding than after
making a living or nonliving judgment about words. Rating for
survival relevance could be conceptualized as a kind of selfreferent processing, because participants are asked to rate the
relevance of words to personal survival, although a similar kind of
self-referent processing presumably occurs in the moving control
condition as well. Still, given that the self-reference effect is such
a powerful mnemonic phenomenon, we thought that self-referent
processing would be an appropriate metric for assessing the mnemonic power of survival processing.
There are a number of accepted ways to induce self-referential
processing. When nontrait words are used as stimuli, as in the
present experiments, one common method is to ask participants to
retrieve an autobiographical memory related to the presented word
(e.g., Klein, Loftus, & Burton, 1989); in their meta-analysis of the
self-reference literature, Symons and Johnson (1997) found that
autobiographical self-referent tasks are among the most effective
means for demonstrating the self-reference effect. Experiment 4
1

Conditionalizing the data in this way raises some concerns. For example, it is not clear whether a rating of 1 in the survival condition means the
same thing as a rating of 1 in the moving condition. Moreover, because this
is a quasi-experimental variable, different numbers of observations contributed to each cell. In addition, it was necessary to restrict the analysis to
the 34 participants who made each of the relevant rating responses.

SURVIVAL PROCESSING ENHANCES RETENTION

once again used a within-subject design: In separate blocks, participants were asked to rate words for their survival relevance and,
in the self-reference condition, how easily each word brought to
mind an important personal experience.

Participants and apparatus. Fifty Purdue undergraduates participated for partial course credit. Stimuli were presented and
controlled using the equipment from the earlier experiments.
Materials and design. Participants rated 32 target words in
four blocks of 8 words apiece. The words were drawn from the
pool used in Experiment 3; as in the earlier experiments, all
participants received the same stimuli presented in the same random order. The design matched Experiment 2: Participants rated
16 words using the survival scenario (S) and 16 words using the
autobiographical self-reference criterion (A). Rating condition was
once again blocked in trials of 8 words in the form SASA or
ASAS. Half of the participants received each version, ensuring that
each word was rated under both scenarios.
Procedure. All aspects of the procedure matched Experiment
2 except for the self-referent instructions. For this condition,
participants were asked to rate “how easily the word brings to
mind an important personal experience.” For both the survival and
self-reference conditions, ratings ranged from 1 to 5. Two minutes
of digit recall followed the rating task; free recall of the rated
words proceeded for 10 min.

Results and Discussion
Participants were able to provide ratings within the 5-s presentation window on over 99% of the trials, and no significant
differences were found between the survival and self-reference
conditions.
The recall data are shown on the left side of Figure 5; once
again, a significant survival advantage was present, F(1, 49) ⫽
29.88, MSE ⫽ .021, ␩2p ⫽ .38. For the individual participants, 33
recalled more survival-rated words, 11 recalled more selfreferential words, and there were 6 with tied scores. The average
relevance ratings are shown in the middle panel of Figure 5. An
ANOVA on these data revealed a significant effect of condition,
F(1, 49) ⫽ 8.97, MSE ⫽ .199, ␩2p ⫽ .16, but, in this case, the

0.70

5

Free Recall

average ratings were higher for self-reference than for survival;
consequently, the survival advantage cannot be attributed to a
simple effect of query-target congruity. Finally, the response time
data, shown in the right-hand panel of Figure 5, revealed a significant effect of condition, F(1, 49) ⫽ 8.51, MSE ⫽ 70851.84, ␩2p ⫽
.15; survival ratings took significantly longer to complete than
self-reference ratings.
Processing information in relation to the self is usually considered to be an extremely effective mnemonic strategy, especially
when compared with the simple processing of meaning (Symons &
Johnson, 1997). In Experiment 4, however, survival processing led
to an approximately 16% recall advantage over a self-reference
condition. One might argue that our survival task requires selfreferential processing, but clearly that aspect of the task cannot
explain its mnemonic advantage in these experiments. Survival
processing led to better retention than a standard self-reference
control (the current experiment) or a moving condition which,
presumably, also required a form of self-referential processing (see
Experiments 1–3). In the following discussion, we speculate about
the possible proximate mechanisms that mediate the survival advantage.

General Discussion
The preceding experiments were motivated from a purely functional perspective: Why did our memory systems evolve, and what
specific problems might they be designed to solve? Although the
identification of an evolutionary lineage is extremely difficult,
especially for cognitive adaptations, one can use an evolutionary
framework to generate testable hypotheses about cognitive design
and function (Klein, Cosmides, Tooby, & Chance, 2002). In the
present case, our working assumption was that memory functioning is content dependent; that is, our memory systems may be
tuned or biased to help us remember information in a survival
context. From a fitness perspective, of course, it is more important
to remember stimuli related to survival or to other fitness-relevant
information such as finding a mate than to remember random
occurrences in the environment. With this in mind, we expected
survival processing to be a particularly effective mnemonic technique.
Across four experiments, processing information in terms of its
survival value led to enhanced retention relative to several deep

3000

Rating

Response Time

Response Time (ms)

0.65
4
0.60
Rating

Proportion Correct

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Method

269

0.55

3

0.50
2

2500

2000

0.45
0.40

1
Survival

Self-reference

Survival

Self-reference

1500

Survival

Self-reference

Figure 5. Average proportion correct recall, average rating, and average response time sorted by condition for
Experiment 4 (error bars indicate 95% confidence interval).

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

270

NAIRNE, THOMPSON, AND PANDEIRADA

processing control conditions: specifically, rating items for pleasantness, relevance to a moving scenario, or ease of generating an
autobiographical experience (self-reference). We were able to rule
out several simple explanations for the advantage, such as level of
effort or cue-target congruency, and the effect remained robust for
both recall and recognition and across between-subjects and
within-subject designs. Moreover, the effect was extremely consistent across participants. Collapsing across control conditions,
approximately 78% of participants who showed a difference in
retention between survival and one of the control conditions
showed a survival advantage.
Of course, we have not compared survival processing with all
possible control conditions and it is certainly possible, even likely,
that other control conditions can be found that will mitigate the
survival advantage. Memory is sensitive to a host of variables, and
it is generally inappropriate to claim that one kind of processing is
inherently “better” than another unless other factors, such as the
encoding-retrieval match, are adequately controlled (Tulving,
1983). In the present instance, everything remained constant across
processing conditions, including the to-be-remembered stimuli, so
we can reasonably conclude that survival processing enhanced
retention, relative to some established deep processing controls, in
this context.
It is also worth noting that our experiments explored the mnemonic value of survival processing rather than the fitness-relevant
content of information per se. Thus, we did not directly compare
the retention of words that are naturally related to survival (e.g.,
predator words, foodstuffs) with unrelated words matched on all
other relevant dimensions. It was our intuition, however, that
survival processing might be key because item meaning is often
context dependent. Thus, the survival value of an item depends
very much on the context in which that item is encountered. For
example, a pencil is not inherently related to survival, although it
might be in a context in which it could be used as a weapon or as
a device for writing a note that secured freedom or food. The
notion that our memory systems are sensitive primarily to the
quality of item processing, of course, has been central to memory
theory for decades (e.g., Craik & Lockhart, 1972).

Possible Proximate Mechanisms
We have focused our discussion thus far on an ultimate or
functional analysis of the survival advantage; we proposed that a
selection advantage might exist if our memory systems are tuned
to remember fitness-relevant information or, more pertinently,
information that is processed in terms of its survival value. But
what are the proximate mechanisms that underlie the observed
effect? One possibility is that survival processing taps into a
special cognitive adaptation, a kind of memory “module” that is
specialized for remembering and processing survival-relevant information. As noted earlier, some evolutionary psychologists
claim that our minds are filled with such adaptations, each designed by nature to accomplish some specific end (Tooby &
Cosmides, 1992, 2005).
Evolutionary psychologists are apt to be unhappy with this
proposal, however, because the notion of a survival module seems
too general. Nature, or at least the process of natural selection,
would not develop or “design” an adaptation for survival per se;
instead, specific modules or mechanisms are likely to develop for

processing particular foods, predators, and the like. The effects
reported here, to the extent that they reflect the action of cognitive
adaptations, may result instead from the action of multiple modules working in concert— each activated to one degree or another
by the survival processing task. Of course, there is nothing in the
present data that would enable us to identify those mechanisms or
even establish that the survival advantage is mediated by a
survival-based cognitive adaptation. Future work will need to fine
tune our survival scenario to determine more precisely the various
fitness-relevant components that may be influencing performance.
It is also possible that the survival advantage accrues from
proximate mechanisms that evolved or developed for reasons
unrelated to survival. Most memory researchers explain mnemonic
phenomena by appealing to a toolkit of processes, such as rehearsal, elaboration, distinctive processing, and so forth. One
might argue that survival processing leads to effective elaboration
or distinctive processing, wherein participants draw multiple connections between the rated word and other information in memory.
To explain the self-reference effect, for example, researchers have
suggested that the self is “a well-developed and often-used construct in memory that promotes both elaboration and organization
of encoded information” (Symons & Johnson, 1997, p. 372). One
might argue that survival is a rich, easy to access, retrieval structure—something like a superordinate schema—that makes it easier
to encode and retrieve information. Once again, the present experiments do not allow us to discriminate among these possibilities,
although the intrusion data from Experiment 1 suggest that survival may induce some form of schematic processing (although not
more so than moving).
One rather uninteresting possibility, suggested during the review
process, is that the survival advantage may have been caused by
exposure to media programs depicting or simulating survival scenarios. Survival is a frequent theme in media shows (e.g., movies
and television), and in 2006, two very highly viewed television
shows dealt specifically with survival scenarios: one, a “reality”
show in which contestants live for several weeks in an isolated
environment without basic survival materials (Survivor), and the
other, a drama show depicting how the survivors of a plane crash
survive in an unknown land (Lost). If watched regularly by our
participants, then it is conceivable that these programs made the
survival rating task more engaging and/or provided a welldeveloped schema for encoding.
To check on this possibility, we tested an additional 62 participants in the design used for Experiment 2 but queried their
television viewing habits at the end of the session. Participants
were asked whether they watched survival-related programs (e.g.,
Survivor, Lost) and, if so, how often (never, sometimes, frequently,
always). Out of 62 participants, only 5 reported watching one or
more of these programs frequently (n ⫽ 4) or always (n ⫽ 1); the
remaining 57 participants reported never (n ⫽ 15) or sometimes
(n ⫽ 42). Moreover, it is important to note that the survival
advantage in recall remained significant (despite the small n value)
for participants who reported never watching these shows (survival ⫽ .54, moving ⫽ .47), F(1, 14) ⫽ 3.22, MSE ⫽ .012, ␩2p ⫽
.19. We also asked the participants whether they had thought about
or used one of these programs during the encoding or recall tasks.
Again, the survival advantage remained robust and statistically
significant for those participants who reported never using a program at any point during the experiment (n ⫽ 37; survival ⫽.53,

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

SURVIVAL PROCESSING ENHANCES RETENTION

moving ⫽ .45), F(1, 36) ⫽ 5.75, MSE ⫽ .016, ␩2p ⫽ .14. Participants are clearly aware of these programs, but it is unlikely that
media exposure per se is responsible for the survival advantages
seen in these experiments.
Finally, it is conceivable that survival processing simply leads to
more arousal or emotional processing of the rated words. It is well
established that emotional arousal can enhance subsequent retention, although the retention patterns are sometimes complex (Levine & Pizarro, 2004; McGaugh, 2003). Increased arousal might
serve as a general proximate mechanism, something that improves
retention regardless of the specific context. It is certainly likely
that many survival situations induce emotional arousal, thereby
increasing the chances that fitness-relevant information will be
remembered. At the same time, our survival encoding task is
relatively innocuous; certainly, rating whether a word such as book
or juice might help you in a survival context is vastly different
from the emotionally provocative stimuli that are commonplace in
emotion and memory research.
If emotional arousal is mediating the survival advantage in our
context, then one might expect the advantage to depend on the
emotionality rating of the stimuli. For example, the survival advantage might be larger for words rated high for emotionality
because there is more emotional “room” for an arousal effect to
take hold. We did not specifically manipulate emotionality, but we
were able to obtain emotionality ratings for many of the stimuli
used in our experiments (Rubin & Friendly, 1986), particularly for
Experiments 3 and 4. In Experiment 4, for example, there was a
strong and reliable correlation between emotionality rating and
overall recall, r(32) ⫽ .350, but not between emotionality and the
survival advantage (defined as the difference between recall of a
given word when it was processed for survival vs. when it was
processed for self-reference), r(32) ⫽ ⫺.013; a similar null effect
was found in Experiment 3 between emotionality and the survival
advantage in recognition, r(127) ⫽ .034. We also looked at the
correlations between emotionality and ratings. It is interesting that
in Experiment 4, there was a strong positive correlation between
emotionality and the self-reference rating, r(32) ⫽ .513, indicating
that emotional words are more likely to generate autobiographical
experiences; however, there was a significant negative correlation
between emotionality and survival rating, r(32) ⫽ ⫺.199. These
are not perfect tests of the arousal hypothesis, of course, but they
suggest that factors other than emotional arousal may mediate the
survival advantage.

Conclusions
One common complaint about evolutionary psychologists is
their tendency to create “just so” stories—that is, fanciful explanations for phenomena that seem apt from an evolutionary perspective but lack adequate empirical grounding. As the preceding
experiments demonstrate, however, it is possible to use
evolutionary–functional reasoning to generate a priori hypotheses
about behavior that can then be tested empirically in the laboratory. The present experiments were motivated entirely from a
functional perspective by asking questions about why our memory
systems might have evolved.
As one of us has argued elsewhere (Nairne, 2005), there are
compelling reasons to believe that memory is functionally designed (see also Anderson & Schooler, 1991; Glenberg, 1997;

271

Klein et al., 2002). Our memory systems did not develop in a
vacuum; rather, our ability to remember and reconstruct the past
evolved to help us solve problems, particularly problems related to
survival. It is not surprising as a result that survival-based processing leads to enhanced retention, regardless of the particular
proximate mechanisms that might be involved.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the environment
in memory. Psychological Science, 2, 396 – 408.
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (2000). The adaptive nature of memory.
In E. Tulving & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of memory
(pp. 557–570). New York: Oxford University Press.
Andrews, P. W., Gangestad, S. W., & Matthews, D. (2002). Adaptationism—How to carry out an exaptationist program. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 25, 489 –553.
Balota, D. A., & Neely, J. H. (1980). Test-expectancy and word-frequency
effects in recall and recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 6, 576 –587.
Barrett, H. C. (2005). Adaptations to predators and prey. In D. Buss (Ed.),
The handbook of evolutionary psychology (pp. 200 –223). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Bruce, D. (1985). The how and why of ecological memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 78 –90.
Challis, B. H., Velichkovsky, B. M., & Craik, F. I. M. (1996). Levels-ofprocessing effects on a variety of memory tasks: New findings and
theoretical implications. Consciousness and Cognition, 5, 142–164.
Clark, J. M., & Paivio, A. (2004). Extensions of the Paivio, Yuille, and
Madigan (1968) norms. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 36, 371–383.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection
shaped how humans reason? Studies with the Wason selection task.
Cognition, 31, 187–276.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A
framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 11, 671– 684.
Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and the retention
of words in episodic memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 104, 268 –294.
DeLosh, E. L., & McDaniel, M. A. (1996). The role of order information
in free recall: Application to the word-frequency effect. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 1136 –
1146.
Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What is memory for? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 20, 1–55.
Gould, S. J., & Lewontin, R. C. (1979). The spandrels of San Marco and
the Panglossian paradigm: A critique of the adaptationist programme.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London: Series B, 205, 581–598.
Gould, S. J., & Vrba, E. S. (1982). Exaptation: A missing term in the
science of form. Paleobiology, 8, 4 –15.
Kareev, Y. (2000). Seven (indeed, plus or minus two) and the detection of
correlations. Psychological Review, 107, 397– 402.
Klein, S. B., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., & Chance, S. (2002). Decisions and
the evolution of memory: Multiple systems, multiple functions. Psychological Review, 109, 306 –329.
Klein, S. B., Loftus, J., & Burton, H. (1989). Two self-reference effects:
The importance of distinguishing between self-descriptiveness judgments and autobiographical retrieval in self-referent encoding. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 853– 865.
Levine, L. J., & Pizarro, D. A. (2004). Emotion and memory research: A
grumpy overview. Social Cognition, 22, 530 –554.
McGaugh, J. L. (2003). Memory and emotion: The making of lasting
memories. New York: Columbia University Press.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

272

NAIRNE, THOMPSON, AND PANDEIRADA

Moscovitch, M., & Craik, F. I. M. (1976). Depth of processing, retrieval
cues, and uniqueness of encoding as factors in recall. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 15, 447– 458.
Nairne, J. S. (2005). The functionalist agenda in memory research. In A. F.
Healy (Ed.), Experimental psychology and its applications (pp. 115–
126). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Nairne, J. S., Riegler, G. L., & Serra, M. (1991). Dissociative effects of
generation on item and order information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 702–709.
Öhman, A., & Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobia, and preparedness: Toward an
evolved module of fear and fear learning. Psychological Review, 108, 483–522.
Paivio, A. (2007). Mind and its evolution: A dual coding theoretical
approach. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Reyna, V. F., & Brainerd, C. J. (1995). Fuzzy-trace theory: An interim
synthesis. Learning and Individual Differences, 7, 1–75.
Roediger, H. L., III, & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false memories:
Remembering words not presented in lists. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 803– 814.
Rogers, T. B., Kuiper, N. A., & Kirker, W. S. (1977). Self-reference and
the encoding of personal information. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 35, 677– 688.
Rubin, D. C., & Friendly, M. (1986). Predicting which words get recalled:
Measures of free recall, availability, goodness, emotionality, and pronunciability for 925 nouns. Memory & Cognition, 14, 79 –94.

Schmitt, D. P. (2005). Fundamentals of human mating strategies. In D.
Buss (Ed.), The handbook of evolutionary psychology (pp. 258 –291).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Schulman, A. I. (1974). Memory for words recently classified. Memory &
Cognition, 2, 47–52.
Silverman, I., & Eals, M. (1992). Sex differences in spatial abilities:
Evolutionary theory and data. In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby
(Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary theory and the generation of
culture (pp. 531–549). New York: Oxford Press.
Symons, C. S., & Johnson, B. T. (1997). The self-reference effect in
memory: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 371–394.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psychological foundations of
culture. In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary theory and the generation of culture (pp. 19 –136).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (2005). Conceptual foundations of evolutionary
psychology. In D. Buss (Ed.), The handbook of evolutionary psychology
(pp. 5– 67). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Van Overschelde, J. P., Rawson, K. A., & Dunlosky, J. (2004). Category
norms: An updated and expanded version of the Battig and Montague
(1969) norms. Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 289 –335.

SURVIVAL PROCESSING ENHANCES RETENTION

273

Appendix
Stimuli for Experiments 1– 4
Experiments 1 & 2
truck
diesel
mountain
pepper
book
carbon

juice
shoes
finger
aunt
chair
catfish

silver
orange
whiskey
flute
snow

door
broccoli
bear
cathedral
screwdriver

car
sword
apartment
soccer
emerald

silk
teacher
pan
sock
eagle

boy
snake
husband
clothing
workers
sea
master
army
cottage
board
son
dinner
woods
blood
fire
forest
formation
child
cattle
village
alcohol

soil
prairie
queen
bath
needle
gentleman
camp
weapon
dust
metal
landscape
bed
grass
settlement
butter
rock
children
drink
cat
fruit
sugar

disease
snow
landscape
madame
storm

ocean
valley
blood
bed
dinner

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Experiment 3
stone
madame
bowl
liver
lime
girl
mountain
victim
lemon
bird
baby
iron
fox
bear
snow
house
veteran
ladies
wife
fabric
sheep
friend

vapour
storm
soldier
salt
cabin
insect
shore
flood
colony
lord
artist
meadow
tree
bread
jungle
summit
garden
client
doctor
physician
tobacco
tool

python
mother
monk
man
leader
speaker
king
lumber
horse
fiber
water
ocean
string
woman
disease
liquor
people
builder
cane
lake
lion

home
rod
fur
corn
troops
person
chair
chief
river
cotton
dirt
valley
dogs
family
parents
shoes
musician
potato
meat
coast
stem
Experiment 4

clothing
settlement
jungle
woman
queen
corn

iron
python
family
boy
husband
man

home
meadow
liver
vapour
son

salt
parents
stone
soil
bath

Received August 3, 2006
Revision received December 5, 2006
Accepted December 15, 2006 䡲

