Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2004, Vol. 30, No. 2, 343–353

Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0278-7393/04/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.30.2.343

How Positive Affect Modulates Cognitive Control: Reduced Perseveration
at the Cost of Increased Distractibility
Gesine Dreisbach and Thomas Goschke
Dresden University of Technology
A fundamental problem that organisms face in a changing environment is how to regulate dynamically
the balance between stable maintenance and flexible switching of goals and cognitive sets. The authors
show that positive affect plays an important role in the regulation of this stability–flexibility balance. In
a cognitive set-switching paradigm, the induction of mild increases in positive affect, as compared with
neutral or negative affect, promoted cognitive flexibility and reduced perseveration, but also incurred a
cost in terms of increased distractibility. Rather than influencing set switching in an unspecific way,
positive affect thus exerted opposite effects on perseveration and distractibility. Results are consistent
with neuropsychological models according to which effects of positive affect on cognitive control are
mediated by increased dopamine levels in frontal brain areas.

exhibit perseverative behavior and reduced cognitive flexibility in
tasks that require switching between different categorization rules,
such as the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST; Milner, 1963;
Nelson, 1976). On the other hand, prefrontal patients suffer from
increased distractibility and stimulus-driven behavior. For instance, some patients show “utilization behavior,” that is, they
appear to be unable to suppress well-practiced habits in response to
common objects, even if they do not intend to perform the respective actions (Lhermitte, 1983; Shallice, Burgess, Schon & Baxter,
1989).
Although cognitive control processes mediating stable maintenance and flexible switching of goals and cognitive sets have
recently become a major focus of research in both experimental
psychology and cognitive neuroscience (for overviews, see
Goschke, 2000, 2003; Miller & Cohen, 2001; Monsell & Driver,
2000), still very little is known about how the balance between
maintenance and switching is dynamically achieved. In this article,
we argue that affective states play an important role in the modulation of this stability–flexibility balance.
It is well documented that positive affect influences a broad
range of cognitive processes (for a review, see Ashby, Isen, &
Turken, 1999): It has been shown that positive affect enhances
cognitive flexibility (Isen & Daubman, 1984; Isen, Niedenthal, &
Cantor, 1992), increases verbal fluency in a creative uses test
(Phillips, Bull, Adams, & Fraser, 2002), promotes the production
of unusual associations (Isen, Johnson, Mertz, & Robinson, 1985),
reduces functional fixedness in problem solving (Green & Noice,
1988; Isen, Daubman, & Nowicki, 1987), increases a preference
for heuristic over analytic decision-making strategies (Isen &
Means, 1983), as well as facilitates implicit judgments of semantic
coherence and promotes activation of remote associates in memory
(Bolte, Goschke, & Kuhl, 2003). Although these studies indicate
that positive affect increases cognitive flexibility in a variety of
creative problem-solving, fluency, and decision-making tasks,
only few studies have investigated directly the influence of positive affect on cognitive control processes. To date, these studies
have yielded mixed results. Whereas some researchers found that

Intelligent organisms pursuing goal-directed behavior in a constantly changing environment face two fundamental challenges: to
maintain current goals over time in the face of distraction on the
one hand, and to flexibly switch between goals and update working
memory in response to significant changes on the other (Goschke,
1996, 2000, 2003; cf. Mayr & Keele, 2000; O’Reilly, Braver, &
Cohen, 1999). Stable maintenance and flexible switching impose
antagonistic constraints on cognitive control processes: Without
the ability to protect goals from interfering stimuli and prepotent,
but inadequate, responses, an organism would suffer from distractibility and impulsivity; without the ability to flexibly reconfigure
cognitive sets and response dispositions, an organism would be
unable to adapt to changing circumstances and thus would suffer
from perseveration and behavioral rigidity. Adaptive action control
thus requires a dynamic, context-dependent balance between maintaining and switching intentions. Whereas inhibition of distracting
information or inadequate responses reduces interference and promotes behavioral stability, it likely incurs a cost when flexible
switching of goals or the detection of significant, but taskirrelevant, stimuli is required. Conversely, although increased sensitivity for irrelevant information or alternative response options
promotes cognitive and behavioral flexibility, it may incur a cost
in the form of increased distractibility and impulsivity. The detrimental consequences of the dysregulation of this balance are
evident in the cognitive impairments of neurological patients with
lesions of the prefrontal cortex (PFC; Luria, 1973; Shallice, 1988;
Stuss & Benson, 1986; Stuss & Levine, 2002). These patients often

Gesine Dreisbach and Thomas Goschke, Psychology Department,
Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany.
We thank Ulrich Mayr, Leigh Nystrom, Mike Rinck, and an anonymous
reviewer for helpful comments on an earlier version of this article and
Steffi Agsten for running the experiments.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Gesine
Dreisbach, Institut für Allgemeine Psychologie, Biopsychologie und
Methodenlehre, Dresden University of Technology, 01062 Dresden, Germany. E-mail: dreisbach@psychologie.tu-dresden.de

343

344

DREISBACH AND GOSCHKE

participants in a positive mood showed impaired performance on
tasks requiring executive control, such as the Tower of London
task (Oaksford, Morris, Grainger, Williams, & Mark, 1996) or a
version of the Stroop test, in which participants had to switch
between color naming and word reading (Phillips et al., 2002),
others found that mild increases in positive affect induced by
positive emotional words strongly attenuated interference in the
Stroop task (Kuhl & Kazén, 1999). Moreover, Gray (2001) found
that emotional states either impaired or improved performance in
a working memory task depending on whether the task involved
spatial or verbal information.
Recently, Ashby and his colleagues (Ashby et al., 1999; Ashby,
Valentin, & Turken, 2002) presented an elaborate neuropsychological model suggesting that some of the effects of positive affect
may be mediated by increased brain dopamine (DA) levels in
frontal cortical areas, notably the anterior cingulate cortex, as a
result of which the ability to overcome dominant responses is
enhanced and cognitive flexibility is increased. Consistent with the
proposed link between positive affect and DA, unexpected reward
or signals of reward that usually elicit positive affect in humans
cause DA release from brain stem sites in animals (Schultz, 1992,
2000). Moreover, DA agonists (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines) that
enhance dopaminergic activity also produce elevated affect
(Beatty, 1995), whereas DA antagonists produce flattened affect
(Hyman & Nestler, 1993). The idea that DA selectively modulates
cognitive control processes is in line with other theories that
address the relationship between DA, PFC, and cognitive control
(Braver, Barch, & Cohen, 1999; Braver & Cohen, 2000; Cohen,
Braver, & Brown, 2002). In particular, it is proposed that phasic
increases of DA in PFC, elicited by reward-predicting stimuli,
serve as a gating signal, triggering the updating of working memory and facilitating a switch of cognitive set. In conclusion, DA
appears to be involved in the dynamic regulation of the abovementioned stability–flexibility paradox.
Even though the relation between positive affect, DA levels in
different brain areas, and cognitive control processes is complex
and only partially understood, behavioral studies and neurobiological models suggest that moderate increases in positive affect,
which are presumably associated with mild DA increases in frontal
brain areas, enhance cognitive flexibility. However, DA apparently
does not enhance the switching of cognitive sets in general, as
revealed by a neuropsychological study by Owen et al. (1993).
These authors compared the performance of frontal lobe patients
and Parkinson’s disease patients in a modified version of the
WCST, and reported the following dissociation: Frontal lobe patients were specifically impaired in switching away from a formerly relevant task dimension (perseveration condition) but
showed less problems in switching to a formerly irrelevant task
dimension; Parkinson patients were impaired in both conditions.
However, and most notably with respect to our own study, Parkinson patients medicated with L-dopa, a preproduct of DA able to
pass the blood– brain barrier, were impaired only when switching
to a formerly irrelevant task but no longer showed perseverative
behavior. This result supports the idea that increased brain DA
levels lead to higher cognitive flexibility and hence reduced
perseveration.
In conclusion, there is evidence that (a) positive affect, presumably associated with increased brain DA, enhances cognitive flex-

ibility and that (b) moderate increases in DA levels selectively
attenuate perseverative behavior. It should be noted, however, that
the role of DA in cognitive control is complex and only partly
understood, especially in light of the fact that there are multiple
DA pathways projecting to different cortical and subcortical brain
regions, which appear to serve different or even antagonistic
functions (Roberts et al., 1994). Moreover, it is not unlikely that
the effects of positive affect and DA levels on cognitive control are
very different for phasic and tonic changes of affective states or
DA levels (Cohen et al., 2002). It is therefore of crucial importance
to obtain further behavioral evidence on specific effects of positive
affect on different aspects of cognitive control, which may then set
constraints for theories of the underlying neurobiological mechanisms. We consider it as particularly important to go beyond the
demonstration of main effects of affect and to develop tasks that
allow one to differentiate specific influences of positive affect on
different aspects of cognitive control.
The purpose of our study was therefore to investigate differential effects of positive affect on complementary cognitive control
functions. To our knowledge, we are the first to address the
question of how positive affect modulates the balance between
maintenance and switching of cognitive sets. On the basis of our
general assumption that maintenance and flexibility constitute
antagonistic requirements for cognitive control operations, we
derived the prediction that moderate increases of positive affect
reduce perseverative behavior and facilitate set switching, but that
this increased flexibility also incurs a cost in the form of increased
distractibility.
To induce positive affect, we used pictures from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Lang, Bradley & Cuthbert,
1998), which have been shown to elicit affective responses, although these responses need not necessarily be accompanied by
enduring changes of conscious mood. For instance, in recent
neuroimaging studies, brief presentation of affective pictures or
words produced increased activation in a network of brain regions
involved in emotional processing. In particular, positive, but not
negative, stimuli elicited activity in striatal brain regions involved
in reward processing and positive affect, including the caudate,
putamen, globus pallidus, and nucleus accumbens (Hamann &
Mao, 2002). Several studies showed that increased activation in
emotion-related brain regions is elicited even when emotional
stimuli are presented subliminally, below the threshold of consciousness (Kubota et al., 2000; Morris, Oehman, & Dolan, 1998;
Whalen et al., 1998). In the light of these findings, brief presentation of emotional pictures appears to be well suited to investigation of the consequences of mild affective responses on cognitive control processes.
To investigate whether and how moderate increases in positive
affect modulate the balance between cognitive flexibility and
stability, we developed a task that allowed us to dissociate benefits
and costs of increased cognitive flexibility. First, participants were
trained to respond to target stimuli appearing in a prespecified
color while ignoring distracter stimuli in a different color. Then
participants were transferred to one of two switching conditions
(Figure 1). In one condition, they had to respond to stimuli in a
new color while distracters appeared in the previous target color.
In this condition, increased flexibility should facilitate the disengagement from the formerly relevant task, presumably supported

AFFECT AND COGNITIVE CONTROL

Figure 1. Examples for Trials 39 – 41 in both switch conditions. Different
colors are represented by black, white, and gray stimuli, gray being the
target color before the switch. In the learned irrelevance condition the
former distracter color (here white) becomes the target color, and the new
color (here black) becomes the distracter color after the switch, whereas in
the perseveration condition the former target color (here gray) becomes the
distracter color and the new color (black) becomes the target color. In
Experiment 1, each imperative stimulus was preceded by a fixation cross
(250 ms); in Experiment 2, each was preceded by a positive or neutral
affect picture (250 ms) derived from the International Affective Picture
System (Lang et al., 1998).

by a bias toward novel stimuli, thereby leading to decreased switch
costs. In the second condition, participants had to respond to
stimuli in the previously to-be-ignored color while distracters
appeared in a new color. In this condition, increased flexibility
should again bias participants’ attention toward novel stimuli,
which, in this case, should produce increased switch costs. In
addition to capture by novel stimuli, switch cost in this condition
could also reflect persisting suppression of the previous distracter.
It is therefore important to consider whether the presumed increase
of the switch cost under positive affect might alternatively be
explained by enhanced distracter suppression. As we will argue in
the discussion of Experiment 2, our paradigm allows us to distinguish empirically between these two possibilities.
In Experiment 1, we investigated whether, in the absence of any
particular affect induction, individuals exhibit both perseveration
(i.e., increased reaction time [RT] after the switch when they had
to ignore previously task-relevant stimuli) and learned irrelevance
(i.e., increased RT after the switch when they responded to previously to-be-ignored stimuli and had to ignore novel distracters). In
Experiment 2, we presented positive or neutral affective pictures
prior to the imperative stimulus on each trial of the set-switching
task. In Experiment 3, we investigated whether effects of positive
pictures may not be due to their specific emotional valence, but
rather reflect their greater arousal potential. We therefore replicated Experiment 2 with a set of negative pictures, which matched
the arousal potential of the positive pictures.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants. In Experiment 1, 18 undergraduates (7 female, mean
age ⫽ 25, SD ⫽ 2.78, range ⫽ 21–30) from the Dresden University of

345

Technology participated for partial fulfillment of course credit or €4 (U.S.
$5.08). Participants signed informed consent and were debriefed after the
session.
Materials and procedure. On each trial, two stimuli, either two digits
(2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9) or two letters (A, E, O, U, K, M, R, and S), were
presented simultaneously, one above the other, in different colors (digits
could appear in the colors olive, purple, or gray, whereas letters could
appear in red, blue, or yellow). Participants were instructed to respond to
the stimulus appearing in a prespecified color (e.g., red) and to ignore the
other stimulus, which always appeared in a constant different color (e.g.,
blue). The location (above– below) of the target was determined at random.
In a given block of trials, participants performed either a letter categorization task, which required them to indicate whether the target letter was
a consonant or a vowel, or a digit categorization task, which required them
to indicate whether a target digit was odd or even. Participants had to press
a left key if the stimulus was a consonant or even number, and a right key
if the stimulus was a vowel or odd number. Feedback was given only for
errors, in which case the intertrial interval was extended to 2,000 ms.
Targets and distracters were either response compatible (i.e., both mapped
to the same response key) or response incompatible (i.e., both mapped to
different response keys). Stimulus presentation was completely randomized with two constraints: (a) Target and distracter were never identical,
resulting in 25% more incompatible than compatible trials, and (b) the first
stimulus after the switch was always incompatible.
Each block consisted of 60 trials. Each trial started with a fixation cross
(250 ms) followed by a blank screen (250 ms). Then the imperative
stimulus appeared and remained on the screen until a response was given.
The next trial started after 1,000 ms (blank screen). After 40 trials, an
instructional cue (2,000 ms) indicated a switch of the target color. Participants had been informed of this rule change (without specifying the
particular color change) at the beginning of the experiment. In the learned
irrelevance condition, participants had to switch to the formerly ignored
color while distracters appeared in a new color that had not appeared
before. In the perseveration condition participants had to switch to a new
color that had not appeared before while distracters appeared in the
formerly relevant color (see Figure 1). For instance, if in the training phase
the target color was red and the distracter color was blue, in the learned
irrelevance condition the target color was switched to blue and the distracter color to yellow, whereas in the perseveration condition the target
color was switched to yellow and the distracter color to red. The task (letter
vs. digit categorization) was not switched within a block.
Each participant performed three perseveration and three learned irrelevance blocks, each comprising 60 trials. Tasks (letter vs. digit categorization) and switching conditions (perseveration vs. learned irrelevance)
changed every block. The order of conditions was counterbalanced. Assignment of colors to stimuli (relevant, irrelevant, new) remained constant
for a given participant but was counterbalanced across participants. Participants were asked to answer as quickly as possible while avoiding errors.
Prior to the first two experimental blocks, participants performed 20
practice trials with only a single stimulus appearing in different colors.
Design. A 2 (switch condition: perseveration vs. learned irrelevance) ⫻ 2 (interval: before vs. after switch) ⫻ 2 (response compatibility:
compatible vs. incompatible) within-subjects design was used. Response
latencies and error rates served as dependent measures.

Results
RT data. Incorrect responses (mean error rate ⫽ 4.15) and RTs
exceeding 2,000 ms (0.27% of correct responses) were excluded
from the analyses. For each of the six experimental blocks, means
of the remaining RTs and errors were computed for consecutive
intervals of five trials, separately for response-compatible and
response-incompatible trials. The critical comparison is between

346

DREISBACH AND GOSCHKE

the two intervals immediately before the target color switch (Trials
36 – 40) and immediately after the switch (Trials 41– 46). (Analyses with larger intervals of 10 trials did not substantially alter the
results; to rule out the possibility that switch cost occurred only as
a result of a sudden increase on the first trial after the switch, an
analysis excluding Trial 41 was run, which also did not change the
general data pattern). Data were collapsed over the three blocks of
each switch condition.
Figure 2 shows mean RTs as a function of switch condition,
interval (before and after the switch), and response compatibility.
In both switch conditions, mean RT reliably increased after the
switch, especially so on incongruent trials. This pattern was substantiated in a 2 (interval) ⫻ 2 (switch condition) ⫻ 2 (compatibility) analysis of variance (ANOVA), which yielded highly reliable main effects of interval, F(1, 17) ⫽ 17.84, MSE ⫽ 9,006.74,
p ⬍ .01; compatibility, F(1, 17) ⫽ 15.21, MSE ⫽ 5,997.73, p ⬍
.01; as well as a significant interaction of interval and compatibility, F(1, 17) ⫽ 13.52, MSE ⫽ 2,879.17, p ⬍ .01. Planned comparisons showed that RTs increased significantly after the switch
in the incompatible perseveration condition, F(1, 17) ⫽ 19.22,
MSE ⫽ 3,363.59, p ⬍ .01; in the incompatible learned irrelevance
condition, F(1, 17) ⫽ 13.67, MSE ⫽ 8,653.2, p ⬍ .01; and in the
compatible learned irrelevance condition, F(1, 17) ⫽ 5.64, MSE ⫽
4,005.74, p ⬍ .05. Only in the compatible perseveration condition
did the RT increase after the switch not prove reliable ( p ⬎ .40).
To make sure that no other transitions between blocks of five
consecutive trials differed significantly, post hoc comparisons
(Newman–Keuls) were computed for all 11 transitions separately

for each compatibility and shift condition. Apart from the critical
transition between Blocks 8 and 9, only 2 transitions at the beginning of the block proved reliable, due to a sudden drop in RT as a
result of practice.
Error rates. As expected, error rates were very low and did
not interact with any task condition. The overall error rate was
4.15%, and the error rate in the critical trials (36 – 45) was 3.25%.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 clearly show that in both the
perseveration and the learned irrelevance condition, the color
switch incurred a reliable RT cost. The finding that this switch cost
was reliably larger on response-incompatible than on responsecompatible trials indicates that this effect does not simply reflect
an unspecific slowing after the switch of the task-relevant stimulus
category. Rather, the switch cost can be attributed to the specific
requirements in the two switching conditions. In the perseveration
condition, the switch cost presumably reflects the fact that stimuli
that were targets before the switch, but served as distracters after
the switch, still captured attention, thereby producing a response
conflict on incompatible trials. This interpretation fits with previous task-switching studies showing that switch costs are increased
when a previously task-relevant stimulus feature activates a response that is incompatible with the response required by the
current task (Goschke, 2000). In the learned irrelevance condition,
the switch cost can be attributed to either of two underlying, not
mutually incompatible processes. First, there may have been persisting inhibition of previously ignored distracters that became

Figure 2. Mean reaction times (RTs) as a function of switch condition (perseveration vs. learned irrelevance),
interval (before and after the switch), and response-compatibility in Experiment 1. Error bars represent 95%
within-participant confidence intervals based on the corresponding before–after comparison (Loftus & Masson,
1994).

AFFECT AND COGNITIVE CONTROL

targets after the switch. This possibility is consistent with previous
task-switching studies showing persisting inhibition of taskirrelevant stimulus dimensions in situations in which taskirrelevant stimulus attributes elicit a response conflict (Goschke,
2000). Alternatively, the RT increase after the switch of the
relevant stimulus category may reflect increased susceptibility
toward interference from novel distracters, which had a color that
had not appeared before the switch. If novel stimuli attract attention, this should increase the probability that the task-irrelevant
distracters gain partial access to the selection of a response, which
should produce interference on response-incompatible trials. However, so far, we cannot decide whether novelty capture or enhanced
distracter suppression is the cause of the switch cost in the learned
irrelevance condition (we return to this issue in the General
Discussion).
Although it is well documented that switching from one task to
another is associated with RT costs (e.g., Allport, Styles, & Hsieh,
1994; De Jong, 2000; Mayr & Keele, 2000; Meiran, Chorev, &
Sapir, 2000; Rogers & Monsell, 1995; Sohn & Carlson, 2000),
Experiment 1 extends this finding in showing that switch costs also
arise when only the perceptual selection criterion (color, in this
case) changes but the task remains the same. Moreover, our results
show that switch costs can result from different underlying processes (persisting activation of a previously relevant task dimension, persisting inhibition of a previously irrelevant task dimension, or an increased tendency to direct attention to novel stimuli;
Dreisbach, Haider, & Kluwe, 2002; Goschke, 2000; Hübner,
Dreisbach, Haider, & Kluwe, 2003; Mayr & Keele, 2000). On the
basis of these findings, we can now address the question of how
positive affect modulates the balance between maintenance versus
flexible switching of cognitive sets.

Experiment 2
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to test the specific hypothesis
that positive affect reduces perseverative behavior. Our specific
prediction, derived from the neuropsychological theory of positive
affect (Ashby et al., 1999) and theories of the role of DA in
cognitive control (Braver & Cohen, 2000; Cohen et al., 2002), was
that positive affect would reduce perseveration, thereby attenuating the switch cost in the perseveration condition, but at the same
time would lead to increased distractibility, hence impairing performance in the learned irrelevance condition.

Method
Participants. Thirty-two undergraduates (24 female) from the Dresden
University of Technology, aged 19 –29 (M ⫽ 22.02, SD ⫽ 2.40), participated for partial fulfillment of course credit or a small amount of money
(€ 4). Participants signed informed consent and were debriefed after the
session. Half of the participants were assigned to the positive affect group;
the other half, to the neutral affect group.
Materials and procedure. Except for two changes, tasks, material, and
procedure were the same as in Experiment 1: The fixation cross before the
imperative stimulus was replaced on each trial by a picture from the IAPS
(Lang et al., 1998). We selected 10 positive and 10 neutral pictures. The
mean (⫾ SE) valence ratings from IAPS norms for the positive picture set

347

were pleasant ⫽ 7.68 (1.52) and arousal ⫽ 4.71 (2.38), and for the neutral
affect (control) group were pleasant ⫽ 4.90 (0.95) and arousal ⫽ 2.56
(1.85). As we noted in the introduction, there is consistent evidence that
brief presentation of positive pictures from the IAPS produces affective
responses as indexed by increased activity in brain regions involved in
reward processing and the generation of positive affect (e.g., Hamann &
Mao, 2002). Participants were informed that we were interested in how
pictures influence simple vigilance tasks and were told that no questions
would be asked about the pictures at the end of the experiment. In addition,
to control for possible mood differences between experimental groups,
participants in Experiment 2 rated their mood at the beginning and the end
of the experiment on three 7-point rating scales (excited–not excited,
awake–tired, happy–sad).
It is important to note that we did not expect the positive pictures to
necessarily elicit enduring changes in subjective conscious mood; rather,
we were interested in mild effects of positive affective stimuli on task
performance. Consistent with the empirical evidence on the effects of
affective pictures, we assumed that the brief presentation of positive
pictures would serve as quick reward signal that biased cognitive control
processes toward a more flexible, but also more distractible, behavior.
Design. A 2 (affect: positive vs. neutral) ⫻ 2 (switch condition:
perseveration vs. learned irrelevance) ⫻ 2 (interval: before vs. after
switch) ⫻ 2 (compatibility: compatible vs. incompatible) design was used.
Affect was a between-subjects variable, and the others were manipulated
within subjects. Response latencies and error rates served as dependent
measures.

Results
Mood ratings. Mood ratings before the experimental task did
not differ between the two experimental groups. As expected,
subjective mood did not change over the time course of the
experiment.
RT data. The data analytic strategy followed that of Experiment 1. In the positive and neutral affect group, 0.34% and 0.15%
correct responses, respectively, exceeded 2,000 ms and were therefore excluded from the analysis. As can be seen in Figure 3,
positive affect clearly reduced the switch cost in the perseveration
condition, whereas in the learned irrelevance condition the switch
cost for incompatible stimuli was even larger in the positive as
compared with the neutral affect group. This impression was
substantiated by a 2 (affect) ⫻ 2 (switch condition) ⫻ 2 (compatibility) ⫻ 2 (interval) ANOVA with affect as a between-subjects
variable. This analysis yielded significant three-way interactions of
affect, interval, and switch condition, F(1, 30) ⫽ 4.92, MSE ⫽
8,512.24, p ⬍ .05; affect, compatibility, and switch condition, F(1,
30) ⫽ 4.98, MSE ⫽ 5,437.87, p ⬍ .05; as well as a highly
significant four-way interaction of affect, compatibility, interval,
and switch condition, F(1, 30) ⫽ 11.34, MSE ⫽ 3,990.06, p ⬍ .01.
Planned comparisons revealed a significant RT increase for the
neutral affect group on incompatible trials, F(1, 30) ⫽ 17.98,
MSE ⫽ 5,630.7, p ⬍ .01, but not on compatible trials in the
perseveration condition ( p ⫽ .09; see Figure 3). Most important,
the same comparisons were far from significant in the positive
affect group (both ps ⬎ .30). In contrast, in the learned irrelevance
condition the reverse pattern of results was obtained. The positive
affect group showed a highly reliable RT increase on incompatible
trials, F(1, 30) ⫽ 28.88, MSE ⫽ 9,975.4, p ⬍ .01, which slightly

348

DREISBACH AND GOSCHKE

Figure 3. Mean reaction times (RTs) as a function of affect group (positive vs. negative), interval (before and
after the switch), and compatibility in the perseveration and learned irrelevance condition in Experiment 2. Error
bars represent 95% within-participant confidence intervals based on the corresponding before-after comparison
(Loftus & Masson, 1994).

failed significance for compatible trials (F ⫽ 3.37, MSE ⫽
5,823.81, p ⫽ .07). In the neutral affect group, both before–after
comparisons proved reliable, F(1, 30) ⫽ 7.79, MSE ⫽ 5,823.81,
p ⬍ .01 (compatible), and F(1, 30) ⫽ 4.01, MSE ⫽ 9,975.45, p ⫽
.054 (incompatible). It is important that the RT increase in the

learned irrelevance condition was reliably larger for the positive
than for the neutral affect group, as reflected in a significant
interaction of interval and affect, F(1, 30) ⫽ 5.67, MSE ⫽
9975.45, p ⬍ .03. It should be noted that although participants in
the positive affect group already showed somewhat larger RTs

AFFECT AND COGNITIVE CONTROL

than participants before the switch, the main effect of affect was
far from reliable ( p ⬎ .50).1
Error rates. Error rates were again very low and did not
interact with any task condition. Overall error rates were 2.18% for
the positive affect group and 3.59% for the neutral affect group; in
the critical trials of each experimental block (35– 40 and 41– 45),
error rates were 1.40% and 3.40%, respectively.

Discussion
The most important result of Experiment 2 was that positive
affect did not simply exert an unspecific effect on performance but
had opposite effects on the two switching conditions. Whereas
positive affect almost completely eliminated the switch cost in the
perseveration condition, it reliably increased the switch cost on
response-incompatible trials in the learned irrelevance condition.
This pattern of results is fully compatible with our hypothesis that
mild increases in positive affect promote more flexible, but also
more distractible, behavior. However, before further discussing
these results, we have to address an alternative interpretation of
this result in terms of unspecific arousal. Because positive and
neutral pictures differed not only in their emotional valence, but
also in their arousal potential, one might suspect that the obtained
pattern of results may not reflect specific effects of positive affect,
but rather may reflect increases in unspecific arousal. As there are
no neutral pictures that match the arousal potential of positive
pictures, in Experiment 3 we presented negative emotional pictures
that did not differ in their arousal potential from the positive
pictures used in Experiment 2.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 was an exact replication of Experiment 2, with the
only modification being that negative, instead of positive, pictures
were presented.

Method
Participants. Seventeen undergraduates (16 female) from the Dresden
University of Technology, aged 18 –29 (M age ⫽ 20.76, SD ⫽ 3.3),
participated for partial fulfillment of course credit. The participants signed
informed consent and were debriefed after the session.
Materials and procedure. Tasks, materials, and procedures were the
same as in Experiment 2, with the exception that negative affective pictures
were presented on each trial. The mean (⫾ SE) valence ratings from IAPS
norms for the 10 negative pictures were pleasant ⫽ 2.89 (1.66) and
arousal ⫽ 5.25 (2.23).

Results
RT data. The data analytic strategy followed that of the previous experiments. Responses that exceeded 2,000 ms were excluded from the analysis (0.09% of the trials). Figure 4 depicts
mean RT as a function of switch condition, compatibility, and
interval. As can be seen, the results are comparable to those of the
neutral affect group in Experiment 2: RTs increased after the color
switch in both the perseveration and the learned irrelevance condition. A 2 (switch condition) ⫻ 2 (compatibility) ⫻ 2 (interval)
ANOVA yielded significant main effects of compatibility, F(1,

349

16) ⫽ 29.75, MSE ⫽ 2,154.62, p ⬍ .01, and interval, F(1, 16) ⫽
17.01, MSE ⫽ 7,897.00, p ⬍ .01, as well as a significant interaction of compatibility and interval, F(1, 16) ⫽ 5.77, MSE ⫽
1,767.30, p ⬍ .05, whereas the main effect of switch condition was
far from statistical significance ( p ⬎ .80), as were the remaining
interactions (all ps ⬎ .10). RTs increased significantly after the
switch on incompatible trials in the perseveration condition, F(1,
16) ⫽ 20.08, MSE ⫽ 3,955.25, p ⬍ .01, and on compatible and
incompatible trials in the learned irrelevance condition, F(1, 16) ⫽
4.74, MSE ⫽ 3,790.26, p ⬍ .05, and F(1, 16) ⫽ 8.12, MSE ⫽
4,692.77, p ⬍ .02, respectively. The same planned comparison in
the compatible perseveration condition slightly failed to reach
statistical significance ( p ⫽ .06).
Error rates. Again, error rates were very low and did not
interact with any task condition. The overall error rate was 2.82%,
and the average error rate in the critical trials (36 – 45) was 3.08%.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 3 closely resemble those of the
neutral affect group in Experiment 2. In particular, in both the
perseveration and the learned irrelevance condition, the switch of
the task-relevant stimulus category incurred a reliable switch cost
of a magnitude comparable to that of the neutral affect group of
Experiment 2. This clearly rules out that the observed pattern of
reduced switch cost in the perseveration condition along with
increased switch cost in the learned irrelevance condition under
positive affect in Experiment 2 was due to the higher unspecific
arousal potential of positive, compared with neutral, pictures.
Taken together, the two experiments provide convincing evidence
that the modulation of cognitive flexibility versus distractibility by
the brief presentation of positive pictures reflects specific effects
of emotional valence.

General Discussion
In this article, we have addressed the question of how the
balance between stable maintenance and flexible switching of
cognitive sets is modulated by positive affect. The most important
finding of our experiments is that increases in positive affect,
elicited by brief presentation of emotional stimuli, exert a strong
1

As in Experiment 1 post hoc tests (Newman–Keuls) were run for all 11
transitions between successive blocks, separately for each compatibility
and switch condition. In the neutral affect group, the critical transition 8 to
9 was followed by a significant drop of RTs in the immediately following
transition from block 9 to block 10 on incompatible trials in the perseveration condition. Furthermore, the transitions from block 1 to 2 proved
reliable for both incompatible switch conditions, reflecting a sudden drop
in RT as a result of initial practice. All other transitions were far from
statistical significance (all ps ⬎ .16). In the positive affect group the
sudden RT increase in the critical transition 8 to 9 in the incompatible
learned irrelevance condition was followed by a significant drop of RT
from block 9 to 10. Again a significant RT decrease was found between
block 1 and 2 in both incompatible switch conditions. Two more transitions
(block 4 to 5 for incompatible trials in the perseveration condition, and
block 5 to 6 for incompatible trials in the learned irrelevance condition)
slightly failed statistical significance (both ps ⫽ .06); all other transitions
were far from reliable ( p ⬎ .37).

350

DREISBACH AND GOSCHKE

Figure 4. Mean reaction times (RTs) as a function of switch condition (perseveration vs. learned irrelevance),
interval (before and after the switch), and response-compatibility in Experiment 3. Error bars represent 95%
within-participant confidence intervals based on the corresponding before–after comparison (Loftus & Masson,
1994).

effect on this balance. In particular, we obtained opposite effects in
the perseveration and the learned irrelevance condition under positive affect: Whereas the presentation of positive emotional pictures during a set-switching task virtually eliminated perseveration
of a previously activated cognitive set, when participants had to
switch to a new task dimension and formerly task-relevant stimuli
served as distracters, positive affect even increased the switch cost
in the learned irrelevance condition, in which participants switched
to a previously task-irrelevant stimulus category and had to ignore
novel distracters. These increased switch costs (especially on incompatible trials) in the positive affect group may reflect greater
interference from novel distracters, which attract attention and thus
may lead to the activation of incompatible responses. In the light
of these considerations, the disordinal interaction obtained in Experiment 2 can be explained in a straightforward manner by the
assumption that positive affect biases attention toward novel stimuli. This should facilitate a switch to a new stimulus category and
thus reduce perseveration, but at the same time increase distractibility, when novel stimuli serve as distracters.
As we noted in the introduction, there is an alternative account
of the switch cost in the learned irrelevance condition that is based
on the assumption that at least part of the switch cost is due to
persisting suppression of the previous distracter. One might therefore suspect that the increased switch cost under positive affect in
the learned irrelevance condition does not reflect novelty capture,
but, instead, enhanced distracter suppression. This possibility
would be in line with recent findings of reduced Stroop interference under positive affect as reported by Kuhl and Kazén (1999).
It is important that novelty capture and distracter suppression make
different predictions in the present paradigm. If positive affect had
enhanced distracter suppression, this should have occurred not

only before the switch (thereby making it more difficult to switch
to the former distracter), but also after the switch (thereby causing
less interference from the new distracter). Hence, under positive
affect the (increased) disadvantage of having to switch to the
strongly inhibited former distracter should be equalized by the
(increased) advantage of the enhanced distracter suppression on
postswitch trials.2 However, contrary to this prediction, our data
clearly show that positive affect did increase switch cost in the
learned irrelevance condition. By the same logic, the distracter
suppression and novelty capture hypotheses make different predictions for the interaction of positive affect and compatibility
before the switch. If positive affect increases distracter suppression, we should expect a reduced compatibility effect compared
with the neutral condition; by contrast, if positive affect increases
novelty capture, we should expect no (affect dependent) difference
in the compatibility effect before the switch because target and
distracter are equally novel. Again, our data are perfectly consistent with the novelty capture hypothesis but contain no support for
enhanced distracter suppression under positive affect: The respective interaction of affect and compatibility for before-switch trials
was far from reliable, F(1, 30) ⫽ 0.90, MSE ⫽ 4,838.74, p ⬎ .30,
whereas the corresponding Affect ⫻ Compatibility interaction for
after-switch trials was highly significant, F(1, 30) ⫽ 8.04, MSE ⫽
6,195.77, p ⬍ .01. On the basis of an effect size of f 2 ⫽ .22 for
after-switch trials, the estimated power for the before-switch trials
2
This argument, of course, only holds if we assume that the effects of
enhanced distracter suppression before and after the switch are offsetting.
Even though we do not know whether this is what actually happens, it at
least would be the most parsimonious account.

AFFECT AND COGNITIVE CONTROL

is .95 (Faul & Erdfelder, 1992). Hence it cannot be argued that the
null effect in the before-switch trials was due to a lack of statistical
power. In conclusion, the interpretation of the data pattern in terms
of novelty capture provides a parsimonious account, as it can hold
for both the perseveration and the learned irrelevance condition.
An additional control condition in which both distracter and
target are presented in a new color on postswitch trials might
further help to disentangle the alternative interpretations of enhanced distracter suppression and novelty capture. Under the novelty capture hypothesis, both distracter and target should attract
attention under positive affect, canceling each other out. The
enhanced distracter suppression on the other side would predict
smaller switch costs under positive affect than in the perseveration
condition.3 However, even though we do think that the differentiation between novelty capture and enhanced distracter suppression is of major theoretical interest, we do not consider this to be
the main point in this study. What we want to show (and think is
supported by our data) is that positive affect has selective influences on processes of cognitive control.
Taken together, the data presented here provide strong support
for the idea that positive affect plays an important role in the
modulation of cognitive control, and are consistent with the interpretation that positive affect enhances cognitive flexibility but also
incurs a complementary cost in the form of increased distractibility. In important ways, the present findings go beyond those of
previous studies in showing that positive affect neither simply
improves performance on tasks requiring cognitive flexibility (e.g.,
Ashby et al., 1999; Bolte et al., 2003; Green & Noice, 1988; Isen
& Daubman, 1984; Isen et al., 1987, 1992; Kuhl & Kazén, 1999;
Phillips et al., 2002), nor leads to unspecific impairments on tasks
requiring executive functions (e.g., Oaksford et al., 1996). Rather,
positive affect appears to exert differential effects on complementary control processes (cf. Gray, 2001). This fact may account for
a seeming discrepancy between our findings and the recent study
by Phillips et al. (2002), who found that a positive mood impaired
performance in a switching condition of the Stroop test. Switching
between the color naming and word reading tasks in a Stroop task
does not allow one to disentangle the contribution of perseveration
of a previously relevant task and of interference from novel distracters to the switch cost.
On a more general theoretical level, the research reported in this
article is consistent with the assumption that stable maintenance
and flexible switching impose antagonistic constraints on cognitive control processes (Goschke, 1996, 2003). Within this framework, action control is conceived of as an optimization problem,
which requires a dynamic, context-sensitive balance between antagonistic constraints. We assume that the balance between maintenance and switching of cognitive sets depends critically on
global system parameters, for example the activation threshold that
must be exceeded by new information to gain access to working
memory. When this threshold is low, the contents of working
memory will be updated rapidly and frequently, which should
enhance cognitive flexibility and background monitoring of potentially relevant stimuli outside the current task focus, but also
increase distractibility. Conversely, a high activation threshold
supports efficient shielding of the current goal against distraction,
but may also lead to perseverative behavior and reduced sensitivity
for potentially significant information outside the current focus of

351

attention. Whereas such parameter settings may depend on strategic decisions based on a cognitive evaluation of the demands of a
particular task or situation, our findings suggest that, in addition,
affective states play an important role in the regulation of such
global parameters (cf. Dörner, 2002; Kuhl, 2000).
With respect to possible neurobiological mechanisms underlying the modulating effects of positive affect on the stability–
flexibility balance, our results are consistent with recent neuropsychological and computational theories relating positive affect to
moderate increases in DA levels in the prefrontal cortex. One
particular hypothesis that addresses the role of phasic increases in
DA has recently been suggested by Braver and Cohen (2000;
Braver et al., 1999; Cohen et al., 2002). According to these
authors, phasic increases in prefrontal DA levels elicited by
reward-predicting stimuli serve as a gating signal that transiently
enhances afferent input to working memory, thereby allowing new
information to gain access to working memory and promoting a
switch or updating of the current cognitive set. Assuming that the
brief presentation of positive affective pictures served as reward
signals in our participants, our results would fit nicely with this
hypothesis.
An alternative hypothesis on the role of positive affect and DA
in cognitive control has been proposed by Ashby et al. (1999,
2002). According to these authors, positive affect leads to the
release of DA from the ventral tegmental area into the PFC and
anterior cingulate cortex. The DA projection into PFC is assumed
to facilitate working memory, whereas increased cognitive flexibility and facilitation of set-switching is attributed to the DA
projection into the anterior cingulate.
Whereas both of these neurobiological models are consistent
with our finding of improved cognitive flexibility, the relation
between DA and positive affect in the regulation of cognitive
control clearly requires further research. Apart from the fact that
the role of phasic and tonic changes in affective states and DA
levels is not yet sufficiently understood, there is evidence that
different DA pathways serve different, or even antagonistic, functions (Robbins & Everitt, 1996). For instance, whereas phasic
increases in DA levels appear to facilitate the updating of working
memory and the switching of cognitive set (Braver & Cohen,
2000), tonic increases of prefrontal DA levels appear to improve
maintenance of information in working memory (Cohen et al.,
2002; Durstewitz, Kelc, & Güntürkün, 1999).
One obvious question concerns the adaptive function of the
observed affective modulation of the stability–flexibility balance.
Why should the cognitive system exhibit increased flexibility and
a bias toward novelty in response to positive affective stimuli? One
plausible, albeit speculative, possibility is that positive affect
serves as an appraisal signal indicating the absence of danger or
obstacles in the pursuit of current goals, thereby promoting less
focused, explorative modes of thought and behavior. For instance,
Fiedler (2001) has suggested that positive affect encourages exploration and creativity, whereas negative affect and aversive
situations encourage avoidance of mistakes and thus promote a
more focused or analytic mode of processing. Fiedler (2001)
3
We would like to thank Ulrich Mayr for the suggestion of this control
condition.

DREISBACH AND GOSCHKE

352

further assumes that positive affect modulates the balance between
an accommodative processing style, which conserves input information, and an assimilative style, which transforms input information in the light of existing knowledge. Despite differences in
terminology, this assumption fits nicely with the present idea that
positive affect modulates the balance between cognitive flexibility
and stability.
In summary, adaptive action requires a dynamic, contextdependent balance between maintenance and switching of goals,
cognitive sets, and behavioral dispositions. Our results show that
affective processes play an important role in regulating this balance. Even moderate phasic increases in positive affect induced by
brief presentations of affective pictures had dramatic effects on the
ability to disengage from a previously task-relevant stimulus category and to switch to a new category.

References
Allport, D. A., Styles, E. A., & Hsieh, S. (1994). Shifting intentional set:
Exploring the dynamic control of tasks. In C. Umilta & M. Moscovitch
(Eds.), Attention and Performance XV (pp. 421– 452). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Ashby, F. G., Isen, A. M, & Turken, U. (1999). A neuropsychological
theory of positive affect and its influence on cognition. Psychological
Review, 106, 529 –550.
Ashby, F. G., Valentin, V. V., & Turken, A. U. (2002). The effects of
positive affect and arousal on working memory and executive attention:
Neurobiology and computational models. In S. Moore & M. Oaksford
(Eds.), Emotional Cognition: From Brain to Behaviour. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Beatty, J. (1995). Principles of behavioral neuroscience. Dubuque, IA:
Brown & Benchmark
Bolte, A., Goschke, T., & Kuhl, J. (2003). Emotion and intuition: Effects
of positive and negative mood on implicit judgments of semantic coherence. Psychological Science, 14, 416 – 421.
Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., & Cohen, J. D. (1999). Cognition and control
in schizophrenia: a computational model of dopamine and prefrontal
function. Biological Psychiatry, 46, 312–328.
Braver, T. S., & Cohen, J. D. (2000). On the control of control. The role
of dopamine in regulating prefrontal function and working memory. In
S. Monsell & J. Driver (Eds.), Control of cognitive processes: Attention
and Performance XVIII. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cohen, J. D., Braver, T. S., & Brown, J. W. (2002). Computational
perspectives on dopamine function in prefrontal cortex. Current Opinion
in Neurobiology, 12, 223–229.
De Jong, R. (2000). An intention-activation account of residual switch cost.
In S. Monsell & J. Driver (Eds.), Control of cognitive processes:
Attention and performance XVIII (pp. 357–376). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Dörner, D. (2002). Die Mechanik des Seelenwagens. Eine neuronale Theorie der Handlungsregulation. Bern: Huber.
Dreisbach, G., Haider, H., & Kluwe, R. H. (2002). Preparatory processes
in the task-switching paradigm: Evidence from the use of probability
cues. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28, 468 – 483.
Durstewitz, D., Kelc, M., & Güntürkün, O. (1999). A neurocomputational
theory of the dopaminergic modulation of working memory functions.
Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 2807–2822.
Faul, F., & Erdfelder, E. (1992). GPOWER: A priori, post-hoc, and
compromise power analyses for MS-DOS [Computer program]. Bonn,
FRG: Bonn University, Dept. of Psychology.
Fiedler, K. (2001). Affective states trigger processes of assimilation and

accommodation. In L. L. Martin & G. L. Clore (Eds.), Theories of mood
and cognition: A user’s guidebook (pp. 85–98). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Goschke, T. (1996). Wille und Kognition. Zur funktionalen Architektur der
intentionalen Handlungssteuerung. In J. Kuhl & H. Heckhausen (Hrsg.),
Enzyklopädie der Psychologie Serie IV, Band 4: Motivation, Volition
und Handeln (S. 583– 663). Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Goschke, T. (2000). Intentional reconfiguration and involuntary persistence in task set switching. In S. Mosell & J. Driver (Eds.), Attention and
Performance XVIII: Control of cognitive processes in attention, memory
and language (pp. 331–335). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goschke, T. (2003). Voluntary action and cognitive control from a cognitive neuroscience perspective. In S. Maasen, W. Prinz, & G. Roth (Eds.),
Voluntary action. An issue at the interface of nature and culture (pp.
49 – 85). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gray, J. R. (2001). Emotional modulation of cognitive control: Approachwithdrawal states double-dissociate spatial from verbal two-back task
performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 436 –
452.
Greene, T. R. & Noice, H. (1988). Influence of positive affect upon
creative thinking and problem solving in children. Psychological Reports, 63, 895– 898.
Hamann, S., & Mao, H. (2002). Positive and negative emotional verbal
stimuli elicit activity in the left amygdala. Neuroreport: For Rapid
Communication of Neuroscience Research, 13, 15–19.
Hübner, M., Dreisbach, G., Haider, H., & Kluwe, R. H. (2003). Backward
inhibition as a means of sequential task-set control. Evidence for reduction of task competition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition.
Hyman, S. E., & Nestler, E. J. (1993). The molecular foundations of
psychiatry. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Isen, A. M., & Daubman, K. A. (1984). The influence of affect on
categorization. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 1206 –
1217.
Isen, A. M., Daubman, K. A., & Nowicki, G. P. (1987). Positive affect
facilitates creative problem solving. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 52, 1122–1131.
Isen, A. M., Johnson, M. M. S., Mertz, E., & Robinson, G. F. (1985). The
influence of positive affect on the unusualness of word associations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1413–1426
Isen, A. M., & Means, B. (1983). The influence of positive affect on
decision-making strategy. Social Cognition, 2, 18 –31.
Isen, A. M., Niedenthal, P., & Cantor, N. (1992). The influence of positive
affect on social categorization. Motivation and Emotion, 16, 65–78.
Kubota, Y., Sato, W., Murai, T., Toichi, M., Ikeda, A., & Sengoku, A.
(2000). Emotional cognition without awareness after unilateral temporal
lobectomy in humans. Journal of Neuroscience, 20, RC97.
Kuhl, J. (2000). A functional-design approach to motivation and selfregulation: The dynamics of personality systems interactions. In M.
Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of selfregulation (pp. 111–169). San Diego: Academic Press.
Kuhl, J., & Kazén, M. (1999). Volitional facilitation of difficult intentions:
Joint activation of intention memory and positive affect removes Stroop
interference. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 382–
399.
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1998) International
Affective Picture System (IAPS): Technical Manual and Affective Ratings (Univ. of Florida Center for Research in Psychophysiology, Gainesville, FL).
Lhermitte, F. (1983). ‘Utilization behaviour’ and its relation to lesions of
the frontal lobes. Brain, 106, 237–255.
Loftus, G. R., & Masson, M. E. J. (1994). Using confidence intervals in
within-subject designs. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1, 476 – 490.

AFFECT AND COGNITIVE CONTROL
Luria, A. R. (1973). The working brain. London: Penguin Books.
Mayr, U., & Keele, S. (2000). Changing internal constraints on action: The
role of backward inhibition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 1, 4 –26.
Meiran, N., Chorev, Z., & Sapir, A. (2000). Component processes in task
switching. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 211–253.
Miller E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal
cortex function. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24, 167–202.
Milner, B. (1963). Effects of different brain lesions on card-sorting. Archives of Neurology, 9, 90 –100.
Monsell, S., & Driver, J. (Eds.) (2000). Attention and Performance XVIII:
Control of Cognitive Processes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Morris, J. S., Oehman, A., & Dolan, R. J. (1998). Conscious and unconscious emotional learning in the human amygdala. Nature, 393, 467–
470.
Nelson, H. E. (1976). A modified card sorting task sensitive to frontal lobe
defects. Neuropsychologia, 12, 313–324.
Oaksford, M., Morris, F., Grainger, B., Williams, J. & Mark, G. (1996).
Mood, reasoning, and central executive processes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 22, 476 – 492.
O’Reilly, R. C., Braver, T. S., & Cohen, J. D. (1999). A biologically-based
computational model of working memory. In A. Miyake & P. Shah
(Eds.), Models of Working Memory: Executive Control (pp. 375– 411).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Owen, A. M., Roberts, A. C., Hodges, J. R., Summers, B. A., Polkey, C. E.,
& Robbins, T. W. (1993). Contrasting mechanisms of impaired attentional set-shifting in patients with frontal lobe damage or Parkinson’s
disease. Brain, 116, 1159 –1175.
Phillips, L. H., Bull, R., Adams, E., & Fraser, L. (2002). Positive mood and
executive functions: Evidence from Stroop and fluency tasks. Emotion,
2, 12–22.
Robbins, T. W., & Everitt, B. J. (1996). Neurobehavioral mechanisms of
reward and motivation. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 6, 228 –236.

353

Roberts, A. C., De Salvia, M. A., Wilkinson, L. S., Collins, P., Muir, J. L.,
Everitt, B. J., & Robbins, T. L. (1994). 6-Hydroxydopamine lesions of
the prefrontal cortex in monkeys enhance performance on an analog of
the Wisconsin Card Sort Test: Possible interactions with subcortical
dopamine. Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 2531–2544.
Rogers, R. D., & Monsell, S. (1995). The cost of a predictable switch
between simple cognitive tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 124, 207–231.
Schultz, W. (1992). Activity of dopamine neurons in the behaving primate.
Seminars in Neuroscience, 4, 129 –138.
Schultz, W. (2000). Multiple rewards signals in the brain. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 1, 199 –207.
Shallice, T. (1988). From neuropsychology to mental structure. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Shallice, T., Burgess, P. W., Schon, F., & Baxter, D. M. (1989). The
origins of utilization behaviour. Brain, 112, 1587–1598.
Sohn, M. H., & Carlson, R. A. (2000). Effects of repetition and foreknowledge in task-set reconfiguration. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1445–1460.
Stuss, D. T., & Benson, D. F. (1986). The frontal lobes. New York: Raven
Press.
Stuss, D. T., & Levine, B. (2002). Adult clinical neuropsychology: Lessons
from studies of the frontal lobes. Annual Review of Psychology, 53,
401– 433.
Whalen, P. J., Rauch, S. L., Etcoff, N. L., McInerney, S. C., Lee, M. B., &
Jenike, M. A. (1998). Masked presentations of emotional facial expressions modulate amygdala activity without explicit knowledge. Journal
of Neuroscience, 18, 411– 418.

Received March 13, 2003
Revision received September 23, 2003
Accepted September 25, 2003 䡲

