Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
http://psp.sagepub.com

Perceiving Intergroup Conflict: From Game Models to Mental Templates
Nir Halevy, Lilach Sagiv, Sonia Roccas and Gary Bornstein
Pers Soc Psychol Bull 2006; 32; 1674
DOI: 10.1177/0146167206291947
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://psp.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/32/12/1674

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Inc.

Additional services and information for Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://psp.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://psp.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations http://psp.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/32/12/1674

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

Perceiving Intergroup Conflict:
From Game Models to Mental Templates
Nir Halevy
Lilach Sagiv
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Sonia Roccas
Open University
Gary Bornstein
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
This article puts forward a parsimonious framework for studying
subjective perceptions of real-life intergroup conflicts. Four studies
were conducted to explore how individuals perceive the strategic
properties of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Studies 1 and 2
found theory-driven associations between people’s subjective perception of the conflict’s structure as a Chicken, Assurance, or
Prisoner’s Dilemma game and their ingroup/outgroup perceptions, national identification, religiosity, political partisanship,
voting behavior, and right-wing authoritarianism. Studies 3 and
4 manipulated the saliency of the needs for cognitive closure and
security, respectively, demonstrating that these needs affect people’s
endorsement of the game models as descriptions of the conflict.

Keywords: intergroup conflict; mixed-motive games; mental representation

T

hat subjective perceptions play a pivotal role in
intergroup relations has been established repeatedly
(Sherif, 1966; Sherif, Harvey, White, Hood, & Sherif,
1961; Tajfel & Turner, 1979, 1986). However, little has
been done to study how individuals perceive the pattern of outcome interdependence in intergroup conflicts. This article demonstrates that people hold
different perceptions of the same real-life intergroup
conflict, namely, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; that
these perceptions are adequately captured by a limited
number of prototypic mixed-motive games; and that
people’s perception of the underlying strategic properties of the conflict in terms of a particular game are predictably associated with other conflict-related beliefs,
attitudes, and (reported) behaviors.

THINKING ABOUT GROUP INTERDEPENDENCE

Research on interdependent decision making has
traditionally focused on the choices individuals and
groups make within a given payoff structure. Researchers
usually create a well-defined situation of social interdependence in the laboratory and study how individuals
and groups act in this setting (e.g., Bornstein, 2003;
Insko et al., 2001; Kelley et al., 2003; Kelley & Thibaut,
1978; Schopler et al., 2001; Wit & Kerr, 2002). There is,
however, ample evidence that suggests that in real-life settings people not only choose different courses of action
within a given situation but also have different ways of
construing or interpreting the situation (De Dreu &
Carnevale, 2003; A. P. Fiske, 1992; Kelley, 1997; Kelley &
Thibaut, 1978; Kiyonari, Tanida, & Yamagishi, 2000; Van
Vugt, Meertens, & Van Lange, 1995; Weber, Kopelman, &
Messick, 2004). Thus, unlike interdependent decision
Authors’ Note: This research was supported by grants from the Israel
Foundation Trustees (027/05), the Gilo Center for Citizenship,
Democracy and Civic Education, and the Davis Institute for the Study
of International Relations to Nir Halevy; a grant from the Recanati
Fund of the School of Business Administration at the Hebrew
University to Lilach Sagiv; and a grant from the Israel Science
Foundation (535/05) to Gary Bornstein. We wish to thank the editor
and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. We also
wish to thank Shahar Halevy for her assistance in data collection.
Please address correspondence to The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Department of Psychology, Mt. Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel, 91905;
e-mail: nyh@mscc.huji.ac.il.
PSPB, Vol. 32 No. 12, December 2006 1674-1689
DOI: 10.1177/0146167206291947
© 2006 by the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Inc.

1674

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

Halevy et al. / PERCEIVING INTERGROUP CONFLICT
TABLE 1: The Chicken, Assurance, and Prisoner’s Dilemma Games
Chicken
Player II

Player I

C
D

C

D

3,3
4,2

2,4
1,1
Assurance
Player II

Player I

C
D

C

D

4,4
3,1

1,3
2,2
Prisoner’s Dilemma
Player II

Player I

C
D

C

D

3,3
4,1

1,4
2,2

NOTE: Entries in the table represent payoffs on an order scale, with
higher figures denoting more desirable outcomes. In each cell, the
left figure represents the payoff to the row player and the right figure
represents the payoff to the column player.

making in laboratory settings, in which the nature of the
situation is assumed to be common knowledge, in reality
the same objective1 situation can evoke different subjective interpretations.
PERCEIVING THE ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICT AS A MIXED-MOTIVE GAME

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a violent, ongoing
intergroup conflict that combines ethnic, national,
political, and religious elements. This conflict constitutes the major cleavage dimension in Israeli politics
and distinguishes the political left and right in Israel
(Barnea & Schwartz, 1998; Shamir & Shamir, 2000).
Although this conflict is at times highly destructive, we
maintain that it is best modeled as a mixed-motive game.
The literature on experimental games distinguishes fully
cooperative games, in which the players’ interests completely coincide, from strictly competitive games, in
which the players’ interests are utterly opposed. Situated
in between these two extremes are mixed-motive games,
in which the players’ preferences are neither identical
nor completely contradictory.
Fully cooperative games are clearly (and, needless to
say, regrettably) not relevant for describing the IsraeliPalestinian game. Strictly competitive games are also of

1675

limited relevance. Although individuals sometimes perceive intergroup conflicts to be strictly competitive (as
research on fixed-pie perceptions shows; e.g., De Dreu
& Carnevale, 2003), “in everyday life the protagonists’
interests are seldom strictly opposed” (Colman, 1999,
p. 54). Even in a full-scale war, the most extreme manifestation of intergroup conflict, there is always a common
interest, “even if only in the avoidance of mutual disaster”
(Schelling, 1980, p. 83; see also Luce & Raiffa, 1957).
Indeed, agreeing with Colman (1999) that “strictly
competitive games certainly occur in everyday life, but
mixed-motive games are undoubtedly more common”
(p. 54), most researchers have employed the latter category of games to model intergroup conflicts (Axelrod,
1984; Plous, 1985, 1987; Powell, 1989; Roy, 1994).
The current investigation thus focuses on three prototypic mixed-motive games, namely, the Chicken,
Assurance, and Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) games, which
we believe adequately capture both the reality and lay
perceptions of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Table 1
presents the structure of these three games.
The games in Table 1 are 2 × 2 games where each
player has to choose whether to cooperate (C) or to
defect (D). The three games are similar in the sense that
mutual cooperation (CC) yields better outcomes for
both sides than mutual competition (DD), but when one
side competes while the other side cooperates, the outcome for the unilateral competitor is higher than that
for the unilateral cooperator. The three games are different in that the outcome resulting from mutual cooperation is highest in Assurance and lower in PD and
Chicken, whereas the outcome resulting from mutual
competition is lowest in Chicken and higher in PD and
Assurance games.
We now describe in more detail the strategic properties of each of these games in turn. The game of Chicken
models conflicts that involve mutual threat (e.g., military
confrontations or disputes between management and
workers), where the failure of either group to yield leads
to the DD outcome (e.g., war or strike), which is disastrous to both sides. The fundamental strategic considerations in the Chicken game can be described as follows. If
one group fears that the other group will compete
(choose D), its best response is to cooperate or yield
(choose C). However, if a group assumes that the other
group will choose not to compete (i.e., chicken out), its
best response is to compete. These two asymmetric outcomes (DC and CD) are equilibrium points, meaning
that no side has an incentive to deviate from either of
them unilaterally. Thus, the group that convincingly commits itself to the competitive strategy (D) is bound to win,
provided that the other group is rational. Of course, if
both groups compete in an attempt to win the game, both
are exposed to the risk of getting the mutually disastrous

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

1676

PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN

DD outcome (i.e., a head-on collision; e.g., Rapoport &
Chammah, 1966; Schelling, 1980).
The strategic considerations in the Assurance game
are virtually reversed. If one group fears that the other
group might compete (choose D), its best response is
also to compete. Competition is the safest (i.e., maximin) strategy, which protects the group from the possibility of losing the competition and guarantees a reward
greater than that resulting from unilateral cooperation.
Yet, if a group expects the outgroup to behave cooperatively (choose C), its best response is also to cooperate.
The mutually cooperative (CC) outcome yields the highest payoff in this game for both sides—higher than the
payoff for unilateral defection (e.g., Jervis, 1978; Skyrms,
2004). Both the mutually competitive (DD) and the
mutually cooperative (CC) outcomes are equilibrium
points, and no group can benefit from unilaterally deviating from them. The game of Assurance thus models a
relatively benign conflict where the temptation of each
side to compete for defensive reasons is balanced by the
strong preference of both sides for mutual cooperation.
In the PD game, the optimal strategy for each group
is to compete (choose D), regardless of whether the
other group is expected to cooperate or compete. Thus,
unlike the Assurance game, where the groups’ incentive
to compete is clearly defensive (a rational group should
compete only if it expects the outgroup to compete as
well), or the Chicken game, where the groups’ incentive
to compete is clearly offensive (a rational group should
compete only if it expects the outgroup not to compete), competition in the PD game can be motivated by
either defensive or offensive reasons. The DD outcome
resulting from mutual competition is the only equilibrium of the (one-shot) PD game. However, it is collectively deficient; if both groups compete, each receives a
payoff that is smaller than the payoff obtained if both
groups cooperate. Consequently, both groups prefer
mutual cooperation to mutual defection (e.g., Colman,
1999; Poundstone, 1992; Rapoport & Chammah, 1965).

GROUP INTERDEPENDENCE AND
INTERGROUP PERCEPTIONS

Intergroup Perceptions in Experimental Settings
Experiments by Bornstein (1992; Bornstein, Mingelrin,
& Rutte, 1996) demonstrated that the structural properties of these three games have profound effects on
people’s beliefs about ingroup and outgroup members
as well as on their expectations about the outcomes of
the competition. These experiments involved competition between two groups and showed that when group
members were allowed a short period of discussion to

select a joint group strategy, most groups in the Chicken,
Assurance, and PD games chose to compete against the
outgroup. However, the rationale for choosing the competitive strategy (as coded from group discussions) and
the beliefs of individual group members following discussion (as reflected in the postdecision questionnaire)
differed systematically as a function of game type.2
The choice of the competitive strategy in the
Assurance game was based on distrust or fear of the
opponent. Ingroup members expected the outgroup to
compete and decided to protect themselves against losing the game by making the same choice. This “playing
it safe” scenario was evident in the group discussions,
which included risk-avoidance arguments (e.g., “If we
compete we are assured of at least a tie”) and symmetric expectations for the ingroup and the outgroup
(e.g., “They must be thinking exactly the same way”). It
also was clear in the postdecision questionnaire, where
the participants predicted that ingroup and outgroup
members would be about equally likely to contribute,
and consequently expected the game to be tied.
In contrast, the decision to compete in the Chicken
game was clearly motivated by greed. Group discussions
contained risk-taking arguments (e.g., “If we compete,
it’s either all or nothing”) and asymmetric ingroup/
outgroup expectations. Specifically, participants expected
the outgroup to be less likely to compete (or more
likely to chicken out) and consequently assessed the
ingroup’s chances of winning as much higher than the
outgroup’s. In the PD game (Bornstein, 1992), the decision to compete was motivated by both defensive and
offensive reasons. Group members assumed that the
ingroup was somewhat more likely to compete than the
outgroup and estimated their own group’s chances of
winning the game as slightly higher.
Experiments that allowed nonbinding communication (cheap talk) between the competing groups as well
further establish the importance of the games’ payoff
structure in determining intergroup beliefs and behaviors. Bornstein and Gilula (2003) found that betweengroup communication invariably led to the mutually
cooperative outcome in the Assurance game while having absolutely no effect on cooperation in the Chicken
game (again, as compared with the no-communication
condition, Bornstein et al., 1996).
These differential effects are again attributed to the
structural differences between the two games. In the
Assurance game, where the only rational reason to compete is fear of an irrational or competitive opponent (or
fear of the opponent’s fear, and so on), communication
was effectively used to reassure each group of the other
group’s rationality (its intention to maximize absolute,
rather then relative, payoffs), verify a common understanding of the game’s payoff structure, and enhance

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

Halevy et al. / PERCEIVING INTERGROUP CONFLICT
trust through an explicit agreement of mutual cooperation (Majeski & Fricks, 1995). In the Chicken game,
communication was utterly useless. Although promises
to play cooperatively often were exchanged, none were
kept, and the game was played as competitively, and as
inefficiently, as in the no-communication experiment
(Bornstein et al., 1996). Furthermore, between-group
communication did little to change the biased ingroup/
outgroup perceptions; group members still saw themselves as more determined than their rivals and were still
confident about their chances to win the game.
Another experiment that studied the effect of betweengroup communication in the PD game (Bornstein,
1992) found it to be less effective in bringing about a
peaceful resolution than in the Assurance game yet
more effective in doing so than in the Chicken game.
Moreover, between-group communication in the PD
game, while significantly reducing the bias in ingroup/
outgroup perceptions, did not eliminate it altogether.
Thus, both the theoretical analysis of the games’ structure and the experimental results suggest that intergroup cooperation is more feasible in the Assurance
and PD games than in the Chicken game.
Intergroup Perceptions in Real-Life Contexts
As argued above, perceptions of the strategic properties of real-life conflicts are subjective. Some people can
perceive a given conflict as a game of Chicken, where winning is what matters most; others as a game of Assurance,
where the crucial thing is not losing; and yet others as a
PD game, where both winning and not losing are important (e.g., Plous, 1985, 1987). We assume that the same
relations between game structure and intergroup perceptions observed in the laboratory would apply outside
the laboratory as well. Accordingly, we hypothesize that
the particular way in which individuals perceive or frame
the structure of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will be associated with their beliefs about the ingroup, the outgroup,
and the expected outcomes of the intergroup conflict.
In addition, people have a strong need for cognitive
consistency (Abelson et al., 1968; Festinger, 1957),
which serves as a mental “glue” that binds together different beliefs and attitudes into complex social and
political syndromes (e.g., ethnocentrism, LeVine &
Campbell, 1972; political conservatism, Jost, Glaser,
Kruglanski, & Sulloway, 2003). We therefore expect
people’s perception of the conflict to be associated with
other conflict-related variables.
Specific hypotheses. Our first hypothesis is that perceiving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a game of Chicken
correlates positively with perceptions of ingroup superiority (i.e., high ingroup bias, S. T. Fiske, 2002; Hewstone,
Rubin, & Willis, 2002), whereas perceiving it to be a

1677

game of Assurance correlates negatively with perceptions of ingroup superiority. We expect people who perceive the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a PD game to
report ingroup/outgroup perceptions located in
between the two extremes reported by endorsers of the
Chicken game and of the Assurance game.
Intergroup conflict enhances ethnocentrism (Brewer,
1999; LeVine & Campbell, 1972), which manifests itself
in different ways in various intergroup settings. In a war
between nations, ethnocentrism can be found in certain
types of national identification (e.g., Kosterman &
Feshbach, 1989; Mummendey, Klink, & Brown, 2001;
Schatz & Staub, 1997). In rivalry between religious
groups, ethnocentrism is reflected in the tendency of
ingroup members to treat outgroup members with hostility and aggression (e.g., Allport, 1954; Beit-Hallahmi &
Argyle, 1997; Fox, 2004; Struch & Schwartz, 1989; White
& Langer, 1999). In political disputes, ethnocentrism
may lead to strict adherence to political partisanship and
ideology and rejection of alternative worldviews (e.g.,
Chambers, Baron, & Inman, 2006; Cohen, 2003; Jost,
Glaser, et al., 2003).
We therefore hypothesize that perceiving the IsraeliPalestinian conflict as a game of Chicken, in which the
only stable solution is the asymmetric outcome where
one group dominates the other, will correlate positively
with national identification, religiosity, and right-wing
political partisanship (including both political orientation and actual voting behavior). Complementarily, we
hypothesize that perceiving the conflict as a game of
Assurance, in which both stable solutions involve equal
outcomes for the ingroup and the outgroup, will correlate negatively with these ethnocentric attitudes. Finally,
as with intergroup perceptions, we expect the associations between these variables and the endorsement of
the PD game to be located somewhere in between.
STUDY 1

Study 1 was designed to explore the basic models of
outcome interdependence that individuals use to represent the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in their minds
and the relations between these subjective perceptions
of the conflict and other conflict-related constructs.
Finding meaningful and consistent associations between
the two would indicate that prototypical mixed-motive
games indeed capture common subjective perceptions
of the conflict and that these subjective perceptions can
be used to predict important social and political phenomena. Specifically, Study 1 examined associations
between the endorsement of a particular game model
and (a) perceptions of conflict of interests between the
Israelis and the Palestinians, (b) evaluative ingroup bias,

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

1678

PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN

(c) national identification, (d) religiosity, (e) political
partisanship, and (f) voting behavior.
Method
Sample. Five hundred and six individuals, including
both students and nonstudents (age range from 18 to
64, M age = 27 years, 45% women), responded to this
survey. All the respondents were Israeli citizens belonging to the Jewish majority group. Respondents were
recruited through snowball sampling that started simultaneously at the campuses of eight institutions for
higher education in Israel (six universities, one teachers’
seminar, and one yeshiva—school for higher Jewish
studies). A research assistant approached potential
respondents on their way into a university library or a
public library, asking them to respond to a survey concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Participation was
completely voluntary and respondents were not rewarded
or compensated in any way.
MEASURES

Endorsement of games. We constructed three different
written descriptions of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to
fit the defining strategic properties of the Chicken,
Assurance, and PD games, as described above. This
method is consistent with the view (a) that perceptions
of intergroup conflict are mentally represented as “stories,” (b) that there can be more than one such story,
and (c) that these multiple stories can be hierarchically
organized in individuals’ minds (Sternberg, 2003).
Three expert judges (scholars who regularly use mixedmotive games in their own lines of research) were asked
to read each of the scenarios and identify the game associated with each description. All three judges correctly
identified the games behind the written descriptions.
Respondents read three paragraph-long descriptions,
each depicting the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a different mixed-motive game (see the appendix). The order
in which the three descriptions were presented was counterbalanced. Participants first read all the descriptions
successively. Then they were instructed to read each
description again (on a separate sheet) and respond to
several questions. This method was used to ensure that
participants read through all the alternative descriptions
before responding. Participants were subsequently asked
to rate on a scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 7 (very
much) the extent to which they thought each description
accurately reflected the nature of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Specifically, they were asked to rate the extent to
which they perceived each description to fit (a) the
nature of the conflict, (b) Israelis’ view of the conflict,
and (c) Palestinians’ view of the conflict. Cronbach’s
alphas for these three items exceeded .75 for all three

descriptions. The responses were then averaged to compute a single endorsement index for each game description. In addition to the rating measure, participants were
asked to order the scenarios from the one with which
they agreed the most to the one with which they agreed
the least. The rationale behind the employment of two
measures of game endorsement was the reasoning that
individuals might differ in the extent to which they use
mixed-motive games to represent real-life intergroup
conflicts in their mind. Hence, including both a rating
measure and a ranking measure to assess endorsement
of games allowed us to assess the extent to which individuals possessed a consistent, consolidated perception
of this conflict in terms of a particular game.3
Perceived conflict of interests. To validate our scenarios, we
assessed individuals’ perceptions of the level of conflict of
interests between the Israelis and the Palestinians. We
expected that individuals who see the conflict as a game
of Chicken would perceive the interests of the two sides as
highly conflicting and irreconcilable and that individuals
who perceive the conflict as a game of Assurance would
see the interests of the two sides as least conflicting.
Perceived conflict of interests was assessed using five pairs
of items, each measuring the subjective belief that each of
the competing sides would achieve its goals. The first
statement in each pair referred to the expected success
of the Israelis and the second referred to that of
the Palestinians (e.g., “The chances that the Israelis/
Palestinians will achieve most of their goals in the conflict
are . . . ”). The respondents’ task was to estimate each
side’s probability of success (between 0% to 100%). For
each individual, we averaged the five probability estimates
for the Israelis and the five for the Palestinians to create
mean expected success scores for the Israelis and the
Palestinians, respectively. A negative correlation between
these two scores reflects the perception that one group’s
success in achieving its goals must be at the expense of
the other group and thus indicates a perception of conflicting interests. A positive correlation between these two
expectation scores indicates a perception of commonality
of interests, reflecting a belief that profits for one group
may involve gains for the other group too.
Evaluative ingroup bias. Participants rated both
Israelis (ingroup members) and Palestinians (outgroup
members) on three traits (morality, trustworthiness,
and violence) on a scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to
7 (very much). We computed a difference score for each
participant by subtracting the rating of the Palestinians
from that of the Israelis (after reverse-coding the violence item) and averaged the three difference scores to
create a single ingroup bias index for each participant.
Higher scores on this index indicate greater evaluative
ingroup bias. Cronbach’s alpha for the scale was .82.

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

Halevy et al. / PERCEIVING INTERGROUP CONFLICT
Ethnocentrism. We used a 16-item scale to measure
national identification. This scale had been validated
in previous research (e.g., Roccas, Klar, & Liviatan, in
press). Participants indicated their agreement or disagreement with each statement (e.g., “Being Israeli is
an important part of my identity”; “It is important to me
to contribute to my country”) on a scale ranging from
1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree). Cronbach’s
alpha for this scale was .92.
We used a single item validated in pretests to measure self-reported religiosity. Respondents indicated
their religiosity on a scale ranging from 0 (not at all) to
7 (very much). Political partisanship was measured on
two scales ranging from 1 (not at all similar) to 6 (very
similar). Participants were asked to indicate the extent
to which their political attitudes normally resembled
those of the hawkish, right-wing side of the political
map and those of the dovish, left-wing side of the political spectrum. We computed a single index of rightwing political orientation by subtracting the response
on the left-wing item from the response on the rightwing item. Higher scores on this index indicate a more
hawkish political orientation. Finally, respondents indicated which political party they had voted for in the
preceding general elections, which took place about 6
months prior to the administration of the survey.
Results and Discussion
Endorsement of games. Two measures (rating and ranking) were used to assess the extent to which each individual perceived the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a
game of Chicken, a game of Assurance, and a PD game.
For each respondent, we compared the responses on
the two measures. Respondents were classified as consistent if they rated a particular game highest on the rating scales and ranked the same game as the most fitting
description of the conflict on the ranking measure.
Respondents were classified as inconsistent if they rated
one game as most fitting but ranked a different game as
the best description.
Of 506 respondents, 335 (66%) were classified as consistent (hereafter labeled the CONS group) because they
provided consistent responses to the rating and ranking
measures. In this group, 67% of the participants perceived the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a game of
Assurance, 19% as a game of Chicken, and 14% as a PD
game. The other 171 participants (hereafter labeled
the NCONS group) were inconsistent in their responses,
favoring one game in the rating scale and another in
the ranking measure.4 We tested our hypotheses separately for each of these two groups.
Results for the consistent majority. A MANOVA revealed
that the order in which the different game descriptions

TABLE 2:

1679

Means and Standard Deviations of the Research Variables
as a Function of Game Endorsement (upper and lower
lines in each row are for the CONS and NCONS groups,
respectively).
Conflict Perceived as a Game of

Identification with
one’s nation
Evaluative ingroup bias
Religiosity
Right-wing (hawkish)
Political orientation
Voting for right-wing
Political partiesa
Voting for left-wing
Political partiesa

Chicken

PD

Assurance

5.41 (.91)

4.99 (.90)

4.56 (1.11)

5.18 (.93)
4.02 (1.41)
3.41 (1.28)
3.94 (2.35)
2.96 (2.44)
2.47 (2.42)
1.81 (2.40)
75%
79%
4%
5%

4.99 (1.03)
2.73 (1.67)
2.66 (1.81)
2.53 (2.10)
2.28 (2.13)
.73 (2.98)
.53 (2.92)
50%
39%
25%
29%

4.53 (.91)
2.01 (1.57)
1.75 (1.27)
1.54 (1.90)
1.69 (1.76)
–1.61 (2.79)
–1.29 (2.76)
18%
20%
58%
64%

NOTE: The differences between means for Chicken and Assurance
are significant (all ps < .001). The differences between Chicken and
Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) and between Assurance and PD are significant (all ps < .05).
a. Indicates a valid percentage. Individuals who did not vote in the
preceding elections are omitted (valid ns = 274 and 123 for the consistent [CONS] and inconsistent [NCONS] groups, respectively).

were presented to respondents did not significantly
affect game endorsement (p > .10 for all three games).
Table 2 presents the means and standard deviations
of the research variables separately for the CONS and
NCONS groups. As expected, within the CONS group,
the relation between the interests of the Israelis and
those of the Palestinians was seen as negative by respondents who endorsed the game of Chicken (r = –.55,
p < .001) and as positive by respondents who endorsed
the game of Assurance (r = .46, p < .001). Also in accord
with our expectations, respondents who endorsed the
PD game perceived the conflict of interests between the
Israelis and Palestinians to be in between these two
extremes (r = .03, ns). These three correlations differed
significantly from each other (Fischer’s Z ranged from
2.78 to 7.77, all ps < .005).
Table 3 presents the correlations between the
research variables for these two groups. In accordance
with our hypotheses, evaluative ingroup bias, national
identification, religiosity, and political hawkishness all
correlated positively with endorsement of the Chicken
game and negatively with endorsement of the Assurance
game. The associations with endorsement of the PD
game were consistently between these two extremes.
Finally, as hypothesized, endorsement of a particular
game to describe the Israeli-Palestinian conflict also was
associated with the self-reported vote in the last general
elections. Specifically, those who endorsed the Chicken
game as a description of the conflict voted primarily for

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

1680

PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN

TABLE 3: Pearson Correlation Coefficients Among Research Variables for the CONS (n = 335, above the diagonal) and NCONS (n = 171,
below the diagonal) Groups
1
1. Conflict perceived as a Chicken game
2. Conflict perceived as a PD game
3. Conflict perceived as an Assurance game
4. Identification with one’s nation
5. Evaluative ingroup bias
6. Right-wing political orientation
7. Religiosity

.17*
.00
.08
.21*
.18*
–.02

2

3

4

5

6

7

.23**

–.37**
–.10

.37**
.20*
–.23**

.45**
.12*
–.36**
.65**

.47**
.18*
–.49**
.56**
.65**

.34**
.02
–.42**
.44**
.49**
.58**

.51**
.01
–.08
–.08
–.04

–.14
–.24*
–.27*
–.22*

.63**
.47**
.42**

.57**
.37**

.56**

NOTE: PD = Prisoner’s Dilemma; CONS = consistent group; NCONS = inconsistent group.
*p < .05. **p < .001.

nationalist right-wing political parties, whereas those
who endorsed the Assurance game voted primarily for
left-wing parties. Endorsing the PD game was associated
with voting for more moderate parties located near the
center of the political spectrum.
We subsequently carried out a more fine-grained
analysis of our ranking data to further test our hypotheses. We expected to find a different pattern of responses
for respondents who rank-ordered the games differently.
Specifically, for all four variables—identification with
one’s nation, evaluative ingroup bias, religiosity, and
right-wing political orientation—we expected to find
the following order of means, from lowest to highest:
(1) Assurance-PD-Chicken, (2) Assurance-Chicken-PD,
(3) PD-Assurance-Chicken, (4) PD-Chicken-Assurance,
(5) Chicken-Assurance-PD, (6) Chicken-PD-Assurance.
To test this hypothesis, we computed four Spearman correlation coefficients between the expected and the
observed order of means for each of the four variables.
Consistent with our hypothesis, the Spearman correlation coefficients were .94 (p = .005) for identification
with the nation and 1.00 (indicating a perfect match) for
evaluative ingroup bias, religiosity, and a right-wing political orientation.
Age correlated negatively (although very weakly)
with endorsement of the Chicken and PD games
(r = –.10, p = .057; r = –.11, p = .049, respectively)
and insignificantly with endorsement of the Assurance
game (p > .50). Level of education did not significantly
affect the endorsement of either the Chicken game
(p > .30) or the Assurance game (p > .70). The mean
endorsement of the PD game was higher for respondents with 12 or fewer years of formal education and
lower for respondents with university degrees (4.17 vs.
3.49, respectively), t(271) = –2.74, p = .007. Finally, men
endorsed the Chicken game more strongly than did
women (Ms = 3.71 vs. 3.30, respectively), t(332) = 2.37,
p = .019, whereas women endorsed the Assurance game
more strongly than did men (Ms = 5.30 vs. 4.72, respectively), t(332) = –3.69, p = .000. There were no gender

effects for endorsement of the PD game (Ms = 3.69 for
men and 3.50 for women, p = .361).
Results for the inconsistent minority. A MANOVA revealed
that the order in which the different game descriptions
were presented to respondents did not significantly
affect game endorsement in this group either (ps > .15
for all three games). As can be seen in Tables 2 and 3, the
pattern of means and associations between the research
variables in the NCONS group was generally the same as
in the CONS group. Nevertheless, as expected, the correlations between the endorsement of a particular game
(using the rating measure) and other constructs were
considerably weaker in the NCONS group.
Study 1 demonstrated that the Chicken, Assurance,
and PD games capture the basic ways in which individuals think about a real-life intergroup conflict. It also
found that individuals use different games to represent
the same real-life intergroup conflict and that these
representations are significantly associated with conflictrelated beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors. This suggests
that the systematic relations between the nature of
group interdependence and intergroup perceptions
previously found in laboratory experiments (Bornstein,
1992; Bornstein et al., 1996; Bornstein & Gilula, 2003)
also can be extended to real-life intergroup conflicts.
STUDY 2

Study 2 focused on the association between the
endorsement of a particular game and the belief that
certain relations ought to exist between the ingroup
and the outgroup. Specifically, Study 2 examined the
associations between endorsement of the Chicken and
Assurance games as valid descriptions of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and right-wing authoritarianism.
Right-wing authoritarianism entails a perception
of constant social threat from either inside or outside
the group. According to Altemeyer (1998), right-wing
authoritarians hold the view of “the world as a dangerous

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

Halevy et al. / PERCEIVING INTERGROUP CONFLICT
place on the brink of self-destruction from evil and violence” (p. 52). Indeed, research shows that the perception of social threat, as opposed to personal threat, is
strongly associated with authoritarianism (Duckitt,
Wagner, du Plessis, & Birum, 2002; Feldman & Stenner,
1997). Because outgroups are often considered a potential source of threat, right-wing authoritarianism, as
a sociopolitical worldview, often is associated with ethnocentrism, prejudice, discrimination, and intolerance
(Adorno, Frenkel-Brunswik, Levinson, & Sanford, 1950;
Altemeyer, 1981, 1988, 1998; Duckitt & Fisher, 2003;
Eckhardt, 1991; Feldman, 2003; Jost, Glaser, et al., 2003).
Seeing the outgroup as a threatening enemy rather
than a potential collaborator predisposes individuals
with a high score on right-wing authoritarianism to
endorse the Chicken game as a description of intergroup
conflicts in general and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in
particular. Consistent with the worldview of right-wing
authoritarianism, the Chicken game portrays intergroup
conflict as a dangerous game, where winning is crucial
and mutual disaster is a real possibility. Also consistent
with their perception of the conflict as a Chicken game
is the tendency of right-wing authoritarians to favor
a forceful reaction to outgroup threat and to believe in
the superiority of the ingroup over the outgroup. We
thus hypothesize that right-wing authoritarianism correlates positively with endorsement of the Chicken game
and negatively with endorsement of the Assurance game
to describe the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Method
One hundred and ninety-four students (M age = 24,
SD = 2, 57% women) responded to this survey. Students
were approached in class by a research assistant and
were offered the chance to participate in a lottery
in which two prizes of 100NIS each (approximately
US$20) would be given out.
Respondents completed a 10-item version of the rightwing authoritarianism scale (McFarland, 2005). Pretest
results (N = 90) showed that this short measure of rightwing authoritarianism correlates strongly (.87, p < .001)
with Altemeyer’s 30-item scale. Respondents subsequently
completed the measure of game endorsement used in
Study 1. Based on the findings of Study 1, which showed
that the Chicken and Assurance games are situated at the
two extreme poles of intergroup perception, Study 2 used
only these two games, omitting the PD game.
Results and Discussion
In accord with our hypothesis, right-wing authoritarianism correlated positively with endorsement of the
Chicken game (r = .44, p < .001) and negatively with
endorsement of the Assurance game (r = –.39, p < .001)

1681

as accounts of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. These
results extend those of Study 1 by showing that endorsement of these game models is associated not only with
views of the ingroup and the outgroup but also with a
social-political worldview that addresses the relations that
ought to exist between the ingroup and the outgroup.
Right-wing authoritarianism, in particular, has important
implications for intergroup relations and might therefore affect the prospects of conflict resolution.
Studies 1 and 2 used surveys to investigate how individuals utilize abstract game models to describe their
subjective views of a real-life intergroup conflict.
Studies 3 and 4 employed experimental designs to
study the role of individual needs in motivating
people’s perception of intergroup conflict. Consistent
with the motivated social cognition approach (e.g., Jost,
Blount, Pfeffer, & Hunyady, 2003; Jost, Glaser, et al.,
2003; Kruglanski, 1996), we maintain that individuals’
endorsement of a simple game to describe a complex
intergroup conflict might be aimed, at least in part, at
satisfying certain individual needs (see also Bar-Tal,
Kruglanski, & Klar, 1989).
STUDY 3

Schematic perceptions of a real-life intergroup conflict are first and foremost information structures,
which follow the same epistemic processes as all other
beliefs (Bar-Tal et al., 1989, p. 237). Study 3 investigates
the extent to which such perceptions are indeed sensitive to an experimental manipulation known to affect
epistemic processes. Specifically, Study 3 focuses on the
effect of an experimentally induced need for cognitive
closure on endorsement of game models to describe
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Certain informational states are considered rewarding (e.g., absolute confidence in one’s knowledge, simplified cognitive structures; Van Hiel, Pandelaere, &
Duriez, 2004). Trying to attain these desired states often
affects the nature of the epistemic processes that individuals employ, as well as the results of these processes.
Specifically, epistemic needs affect the duration of the
quest for knowledge and the mental flexibility exercised
in this quest (Kruglanski, 1989; Kruglanski & Webster,
1996). According to Lay Epistemic Theory (Kruglanski,
1989), individuals dislike uncertainty and ambiguity.
This tendency often leads people to adopt firm beliefs
and prefer simple information structures.
Study 3 was designed to examine whether temporarily increasing people’s need for cognitive closure affects
their endorsement of the various game models as
descriptions of an intergroup conflict. Research suggests that “individuals high in need for cognitive

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

1682

PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN

closure may tend to construe conflicts in a one-sided,
black-and-white fashion. This suggests that a high need
for cognitive closure should be associated with a more
aggressive approach toward intergroup conflict” (Golec
& Federico, 2004, p. 750). Thus, one plausible hypothesis is that temporarily raising people’s need for closure
will lead to greater endorsement of the Chicken game
and lower endorsement of the Assurance game to
describe the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Golec and
Federico (2004) further suggest that a strong need for
cognitive closure might “produce increased reliance on
salient beliefs about how the conflict should be dealt
with” (p. 570). Thus, a second plausible hypothesis is
that temporarily raising people’s need for cognitive closure may lead to increased endorsement of the Chicken
or of the Assurance game, depending on the perception one held to begin with.
We maintain, however, that although the Chicken
and Assurance games have different strategic properties, the two games are similar in the sense that both
enable individuals to replace a complex real-life situation of interdependence with a simplified abstract
structure in their mind. The Chicken and Assurance
are both 2 × 2 mixed-motive games and are thus equally
simple (or complex). We therefore assume that the two
games are equally suited for satisfying the epistemic
need for a simplified mental representation of the
intergroup conflict. Consequently, we tested the
hypothesis that increasing people’s need for cognitive
closure would lead them to indiscriminately endorse
either game as an account of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Of importance, Study 3 was designed to allow falsification of all three competing hypotheses (i.e.,
increased aggressiveness, increased reliance on preexisting beliefs, and undiscriminating endorsement of
both games).
To manipulate the saliency of epistemic needs, we
varied the level of cognitive load (CL). Previous
research has shown that increasing CL renders information processing more effortful and costly so that
individuals are quicker to form judgments and show
greater preference for well-structured information
(e.g., Bar-Tal et al., 1989; Landau et al., 2004). Thus, we
predict that participants in the high CL condition will
endorse the Chicken and Assurance games indiscriminately, regardless of whether they are right-wing or leftwing supporters, whereas participants in the low CL
condition (the control group) would perceive the conflict as either a game of Chicken or as a game of
Assurance, depending on their political worldview.
That is, consistent with the findings of Study 1, when
CL is low, right-wing supporters should prefer the
Chicken game over the Assurance game, whereas leftwing supporters should show the reverse pattern.

Method
One hundred and eighteen students (M age = 24,
SD = 3, 42% women) participated. Participants were
recruited through ads on campus offering a monetary
reward (approximately US$3) for participation.
Participants were randomly assigned to the low CL or
high CL condition. We used a standard paradigm of a
digit-span memory task to manipulate cognitive load.
Participants in the low cognitive load condition had to
memorize (and later recall) a three-digit number during
information processing (i.e., while responding to the
same measure of game endorsement used in Study 2),
whereas participants in the high cognitive load condition
were given a 10-digit number to memorize and recall.
We assessed the endorsement of game models and
political partisanship (right-wing/left-wing) using the
same methods employed in Studies 1 and 2. We computed a difference score for each individual by subtracting the response on the left-wing scale from that
on the right-wing scale. Participants were classified as
right-wing supporters if their difference score was positive and as left-wing supporters if it was negative.
Results and Discussion
In accord with our hypothesis, participants in the
low CL condition differed significantly in the endorsement of the two game models as a function of their
worldview (political partisanship), namely, left-wing
supporters were more likely than right-wing supporters
to endorse the Assurance game, whereas right-wing
supporters were more likely than left-wing supporters
to endorse the Chicken game. The participants in the
high CL condition were equally likely to endorse either
game regardless of their worldview. These results are
depicted in Figure 1.
Specifically, when cognitive load was low, the mean
endorsement score for the Assurance game as a
description of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict was 5.00
for left-wing and 3.69 for right-wing supporters, t(49) =
3.19, p < .005. The mean endorsement of the Chicken
game in this condition was 3.40 for left-wing and 4.73
right-wing supporters, t(49) = –3.12, p < .005. When
cognitive load was high, the mean endorsement of the
Assurance game was 5.00 and 4.55 for left-wing and
right-wing supporters, respectively, t(52) = 1.21, p > .20,
whereas the mean endorsement of the Chicken game
was 4.10 and 4.61 for left-wing and right-wing supporters, respectively, t(53) = –1.02, p > .30.
The results of Study 3 indicate that a strong need for
cognitive closure leads to undiscriminating endorsement of both game models as plausible accounts of the
conflict. The study did not find support for the notion
that the need for cognitive closure increases support

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

Halevy et al. / PERCEIVING INTERGROUP CONFLICT

1683

Method

Endorsement Score

5

4.5

4

3.5

3
Right Wing

Left Wing

Low CL
Chicken

Right Wing

Left Wing

High CL
Assurance

Figure 1

Endorsement of game models by political partisanship
under conditions of low and high cognitive load.
NOTE: CL = cognitive load.

for a competitive, black-and-white (“us or them”) view
of the conflict or that it increases reliance on preexisting schematic perceptions of the conflict.
STUDY 4

Study 4 was designed to examine the effect of security
needs on endorsement of the Chicken and Assurance
games as plausible accounts of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. In contrast to epistemic needs, rendering security needs salient should facilitate a differential endorsement of the games, leading individuals to choose one
game over the other as the more accurate account of
this conflict.
Fear and greed are the two prime motivators for
competing in intergroup conflict (e.g., Insko et al.,
1993; Insko & Schopler, 1987; Insko, Schopler, Hoyle,
Dardis, & Graetz, 1990). Analyses of social motives
in experimental settings (e.g., Bornstein et al., 1996;
Bornstein & Gilula, 2003; Kelley et al., 2003) suggest
that the game of Assurance makes fear and the need for
security more salient than the game of Chicken, where
greed is the prime motivator. In addition, the game of
Assurance provides a benign, reassuring, stable solution
to the conflict situation, which the threatening game of
Chicken does not. Study 4 thus tested the hypothesis
that rendering security needs salient would increase
support for the fear-associated Assurance game but
would not affect endorsement of the greed-associated
Chicken game.

One hundred and thirty-two students participated
(M age = 24, SD = 3, 61% women). Participants were
recruited through ads on campus offering a monetary
reward (approximately U.S.$4) for participation. We
manipulated the saliency of security needs using a mortality salience manipulation derived from research
in the Terror Management paradigm (e.g., Cozzolino,
Staples, Meyers, & Samboceti, 2004; Greenberg,
Solomon, & Pyszczynski, 1997). Participants were randomly assigned to the mortality salience (MS) condition
or a control condition. Participants in the MS condition
read a scenario depicting death by fire in an apartment
building and were asked to imagine themselves in this
situation. Participants in the control condition read
a scenario depicting a harmless visit to a similar apartment building and were asked to imagine themselves in
that situation (Cozzolino et al., 2004). Then, participants in both conditions responded to an open-ended
question asking them to describe their thoughts and
emotions in detail. Following the experimental manipulation, individuals received the same measures of
game endorsement and political partisanship used in
Studies 1 through 3.
Results and Discussion
Manipulation check. Each phrase in the responses to
the open-ended question was coded as indicating negative, positive, or neutral emotions, reflections, and physical reactions. Examples of negative responses were
fear, frustration, stress, anxiety, helplessness, and stating a “difficulty in breathing.” Examples of positive
responses were calm, happy, satisfied, relaxed, fun, and
pleasant. Examples of neutral responses were curious,
indifferent, strange, and describing the story as “unrealistic.” For each participant, we computed a difference
score by subtracting the number of positive responses
from the number of negative responses. Higher scores
on this measure indicate a more negative reaction.
Participants in the MS condition reported significantly
more negative reactions than did participants in the
control condition (M = 1.96, SD = 1.93; M = –1.58, SD =
1.55, respectively), t(130) = 11.58, p = .000.
In accord with our hypothesis, the mean endorsement of the Assurance game as an accurate account of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict was significantly higher
in the MS condition than in the control condition
(M endorsement = 5.12 vs. 4.51, respectively), t(130) =
2.23, p < .05. As expected, the MS manipulation did not
significantly affect the endorsement of the greedassociated Chicken game (M endorsement = 3.69 vs.
3.86, in the MS and control conditions, respectively),
p > .50. The results are presented in Figure 2.

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

1684

PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN

5.5

Endorsement Score

5

4.5

4

3.5

3
Control
Chicken
Figure 2

Mortality Salience
Assurance

Endorsement of game models under conditions of mortality salience and control.

Analyzing the results separately for right-wing and
left-wing supporters indicates that although both
groups were more likely to endorse the Assurance game
in the MS condition than in the control condition, the
effect was statistically significant only for right-wing supporters. The mean endorsement scores for the rightwing participants were 4.67 and 3.62 in the MS and
control conditions, respectively, t(54) = 2.34, p < .05.
For left-wing supporters, these scores were 5.70 and
5.24, respectively, t(58) = 1.58, p < .15. The smaller
effect size among left-wing supporters probably reflects
a ceiling effect because these participants tended to
endorse the Assurance game more strongly to begin
with. Still, Study 4 lends further support to the view that
people’s perceptions of intergroup conflict are motivated, at least in part, by the saliency of individual
needs. Of importance, Study 4 used a manipulation of
incidental (rather than integral) threat caused by an
exogenous source and not by the stimulus under judgment (i.e., we did not use outgroup threat or threat
caused by the intergroup conflict itself as our manipulation). Identifying the outgroup as the source of threat
might plausibly lead to a different pattern of results
(see Study 2 for a discussion of the associations between
perceived outgroup threat and game endorsement).
GENERAL DISCUSSION

Surveys administered to both students and nonstudents in Israel were used to examine the extent to which
subjective views of the strategic properties of the

Israeli-Palestinian conflict can be captured by three prototypic mixed-motive games and whether these views are
associated with other conflict-related psychological constructs. Studies 1 and 2 found that perceiving the conflict
in terms of a particular game was predictably associated
with beliefs and attitudes regarding the ingroup and the
outgroup as well as with more general belief-systems,
worldviews, and behaviors that affect the relations
between the conflicting groups. Studies 3 and 4 provided
initial support for the notion that perceiving the conflict
as a simple mixed-motive game is motivationally functional. Specifically, Study 3 showed that rendering epistemic needs salient facilitates the endorsement of either
the Chicken or the Assurance game. These two games,
being similar in simplicity, seem to be equally suitable for
satisfying people’s need to replace a complex real-life
conflict with a simple mental structure. Study 4 showed
that increasing the saliency of security needs increases
people’s tendency to endorse the Assurance game as an
accurate account of the conflict.
The current research builds on Realistic Conflict
Theory (Campbell, 1972; Coser, 1956; Sherif, 1966), in
presupposing that the (real or perceived) interdependence between the groups is crucial and that different
patterns of interdependence lead to different cognitions and behaviors. However, although realistic conflict theory (as well as research on conflict schemas,
e.g., Bar-Tal et al., 1989; Golec & Federico, 2004) makes
only a crude distinction between competitive and cooperative intergroup relations, we employed a more finegrained distinction between different games, each
containing a qualitatively different mixture of competitive and cooperative elements.
The finding that people use different games to
describe the same real-life conflict also is consistent
with the Social Identity approach (e.g., Tajfel & Turner,
1979, 1986; for reviews, see Brown, 2000; Turner, 1999),
which emphasizes the role of subjective views in shaping intergroup relations. We agree with the Social
Identity approach that intergroup conflict is, to some
degree, in the eyes of the beholder. Moreover, consistent with the assertions of the Social Identity approach,
the present study demonstrates that subjective perceptions of a real-life conflict are meaningfully associated
with group identification.
The results of this research also are consistent with
interdependence theory as applied to interpersonal,
mainly dyadic, relations. Kelley and Thibaut (1978),
and more recently Kelley et al. (2003), theorized that
individuals may mentally transform the structure of a
given payoff matrix and act on the new effective matrix
when making their decisions. Kiyonari et al. (2000)
argued that individuals often transform the Prisoner’s
Dilemma game into an Assurance game and behave

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

Halevy et al. / PERCEIVING INTERGROUP CONFLICT

1685

accordingly. We add to these findings by showing that
individuals subjectively transform the structure of a
real-life intergroup conflict in a manner consistent with
their preexisting beliefs and worldviews.
Our findings also relate to the literature on social
value orientations. This literature shows that people’s
perceptions and behavior in both laboratory and reallife social situations is meaningfully associated with the
value they attach to their own outcomes as compared
with the outcomes of others with whom they are interdependent (Joireman, Van Lange, Kuhlman, Van Vugt,
& Shelley, 1997; Liebrand, Wilke, Vogel, & Wolters,
1986; Van Lange, 1999, 2004; Van Vugt et al., 1995). The
findings of the current research indicate that people differ in their perceptions of the pattern of outcome interdependence. Future research could examine whether
social value orientations affect these perceptions. Thus,
future research on social value orientations could focus
not only on the way people perceive interdependence
situations in laboratory settings (provided to participants in the form of payoff matrices) but also investigate
individuals’ perceptions of the structural properties of
real-life social interactions (e.g., Joireman et al., 1997).
Research on the “Might versus Morality” effect is particularly relevant in this respect. Liebrand, Jansen,
Rijken, and Suhre (1986) found that whereas individuals with prosocial motives interpreted interdependence
decision making in terms of morality, individuals with
proself motives interpreted the same task in terms of
power relations. Van Lange and Kuhlman (1994)
manipulated the perceived honesty and perceived intelligence of partners, showing that social value orientations moderate the effects of this information on
participants’ expectations regarding partners’ cooperation as well their own cooperation. Finally, De Dreu and
Boles (1998) showed that social motives are associated
with negotiators’ information processing in that prosocial individuals choose and recall more cooperative
than competitive heuristics when preparing for negotiation, whereas competitors display the reverse pattern.
Based on these studies, it is plausible to assume that
social value orientations would be related to individual
differences in the endorsement of game models to
describe real-life intergroup conflicts as well.

& McCusker, 1997; Liberman, Samuels, & Ross, 2004;
Weber et al., 2004).
An alternative method would be using 2 × 2 matrices
to describe the games (see, e.g., Joireman et al., 1997;
Kelley, 1979, pp. 85-91). Such a method provides
abstract, context-free descriptions of the games and is
thus less contaminated by a specific social context.
However, such a method might be less natural for participants as a means for reporting their perceptions and
preferences. Lay cognition about social situations is
probably not organized as outcome matrices (Joireman
et al., 1997, p. 443) but rather has story-like qualities
(Sternberg, 2003). Future research could compare the
two approaches.
For the sake of simplicity, two important issues have
been largely ignored in the article. First, the descriptions
of the conflict that were provided to participants portrayed a game that is played once, in which decisions are
made simultaneously with no communication between
the players. In real life intergroup conflicts, the game is
typically an ongoing one, moves are rarely simultaneous,
formal and informal communication is regularly
exchanged between the sides, and each side constantly
observes the other in an attempt to assess its intentions
and capabilities. Intergroup conflicts in general, and the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in particular, are complex
dynamic games rather than simple matrix games.
Nevertheless, we theorize (as does the theory of interdependence, e.g., Kelley et al., 2003) that the static properties of games can provide valuable insights into people’s
behavior and cognition in dynamic games as well.
Second, groups, certainly nations, are not unitary
players. To execute a collective group strategy, the
group has to induce its individual members to contribute the necessary effort (of time, money, and willingness to risk injury and death). Moving from group
decision to group action is not trivial. This is so because
individual contribution, while being potentially very
costly, can hardly affect the outcome of a large-scale
conflict, and the payoffs associated with the outcome of
the conflict are often available to all group members
regardless of whether they contributed (these payoffs,
in other words, are public goods, Bornstein, 2003;
Rapoport & Bornstein, 1987).

Methodological Issues and Research Limitations

Relevance for Other Types of Intergroup Conflict

In the current research, we measured perceptions of
outcomes interdependence (i.e., endorsement of games)
using verbal descriptions of games. This approach
unavoidably involves making choices about the phrasing
or framing of strategies and outcomes. These framing
effects can potentially change the way the situation is perceived (e.g., Allison, Beggan, & Midgley, 1996; De Dreu

What is key to our research is the assumption that a
limited number of abstract interdependence patterns
can capture both the objective social reality of intergroup conflicts and the subjective mental representation
of this reality (e.g., Anderson, 1991; A. P. Fiske, 1992;
Kelley, 1997). Kelley (1997) suggested that the ability to
think about social interdependence in an abstract way

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

1686

PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN

is what enables individuals to develop cognitive, emotional, and behavioral strategies to cope with various
interdependence situations “that are diverse in their
details but similar in their essential features” (p. 152).
The Chicken, Assurance, and PD games may have figural prominence in the stimulus field, which according
to Kelley (1997), gives them prototypic (or “deep structure”; Chomsky, 1980) status in people’s minds.
We suggest the concept of conflict templates to distinguish between the recurring fundamental patterns
or structural regularities used by people to represent
intergroup conflicts in their mind and the very same
games used by scholars to model the reality of such conflicts or to reproduce it in the laboratory. Clearly, as
shown by the present study, people may use different
mental templates to grasp the same real conflict, and
we assume that different conflicts may be perceived
using the same template.
Thus, although the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (similar to any other real-life conflict) has many unique features, the knowledge provided by the current research
may perhaps be used for understanding other intergroup conflicts as well. Preliminary research has already
shown that people differentially endorse the Chicken
and Assurance games to describe religious and organizational conflicts. For example, Halevy, Bornstein,
Sagiv, and Roccas (2004) showed that in the conflict
between different religious factions within Judaism
(orthodox vs. reformed Jews in Israel), social distance
(e.g., Struch & Schwartz, 1989) correlated positively
with endorsement of the Chicken game and negatively
with the endorsement of the Assurance game.
Moreover, as shown by another study, people can
effectively use these games not only to describe personally relevant conflicts but also to reflect on conflicts that
do not involve their own group. Halevy, Bornstein,
Sagiv, and Roccas (2005) investigated how people
attribute different conflict templates to different
leaders. International relations students read verbal
descriptions of an abstract (context-free) intergroup
conflict, portrayed once as a game of Chicken and a
second time as a game of Assurance. Participants were
told that these were in fact paragraphs taken from
speeches by political leaders delivered during a time of
conflict. The participants’ task was to identify the leader
most likely to have given each speech from a list of 12
20th-century leaders. The leader judged as most likely
to have given the Chicken speech was Winston
Churchill, who led Britain in fighting an uncompromising battle during World War II (with Martin Luther
King Jr., Gandhi, and Mandela judged as the least
likely). The leader judged most likely to have given the
Assurance speech was Jimmy Carter, who won the
Nobel Peace Prize in 2002 for his endeavors to find

peaceful solutions to international conflicts (with
Mussolini, Hitler, and Stalin judged as least likely).
Implications for Conflict Management
and Conflict Resolution
This research shows that perceiving a conflict in
terms of a particular game model is associated with
social and political worldviews. Individuals’ need for
cognitive consistency makes it difficult to change one
component (e.g., perceptions of ingroup superiority)
without affecting the others (e.g., perceptions of interdependence). Although this state of affairs seemingly
constitutes an obstacle for improving intergroup relations, it also holds a promise: If one can change the subjective perception of the conflict’s structure, perhaps
changes in other components (e.g., ingroup/outgroup
perceptions) might follow. Similarly, if one changes
ingroup/outgroup perceptions, one also might change
the subjective interpretation of the conflict’s structure.
As our research shows, such perceptions are malleable
to some extent: Both cognitive (Study 3) and motivational (Study 4) experimental manipulations can, at
least temporarily, affect perceptions of group interdependence. Specifically, leading individuals to renounce
the Chicken conflict template in favor of the Assurance
conflict template might increase their propensity to
pursue peace.

APPENDIX
The Israeli-Palestinian Conflict Described in Terms of
Chicken, Assurance, and Prisoner’s Dilemma Games
CHICKEN

In the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, if the Israelis don’t make
territorial concessions and the Palestinians don’t end their violent struggle, both sides to the conflict could end up in a headon collision that would inflict great damage on both. Such a
risk of a disastrous outcome can be prevented only if one of the
sides admits defeat and allows the other side complete victory.
If one side is perceived as more determined and committed to
win at all costs, it can win the conflict by causing the other side
to surrender, provided that it is rational. The Israeli-Palestinian
conflict thus has three possible outcomes: complete victory for
the Israelis, complete victory for the Palestinians, and a headon collision that will end in disastrous outcomes for both.

Assurance
In the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, both sides would be
better off if the Israelis make territorial concessions and the
Palestinians end their violent struggle. The benefits for each
side separately and for both of them together, in this case,
would be as great as possible. Once such a cooperative state is

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

Halevy et al. / PERCEIVING INTERGROUP CONFLICT
reached, it is likely to be sustained by both sides because competition would be self-defeating. However, fear that the other
side will act irrationally prevents the Israelis and the
Palestinians from reaching such a mutually beneficial state.
Specifically, the Israelis fear that the Palestinians might irrationally choose to continue the violent struggle. Likewise, the
Palestinians fear that the Israelis would irrationally choose
not to make territorial concessions.
PRISONER’S DILEMMA

In the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, if the Palestinians end
the violent struggle, then there is no reason for the Israelis to
make territorial concessions, and if the Palestinians continue
the violent struggle, then there is even less reason for the
Israelis to reward them with territorial concessions. From the
Palestinians’ point of view, if the Israelis continue to hold
onto the territories, they should continue their violent struggle, and if the Israelis make territorial concessions because of
the violent struggle, then there is even more reason for the
Palestinians to continue the violent struggle. Thus, regardless
of what the Palestinians do, the Israelis should not make territorial concessions, and regardless of what the Israelis do, the
Palestinians should continue their violent struggle. In this
conflict, however, if the Israelis don’t make territorial concessions and the Palestinians don’t end the violent struggle, both
will lose a great deal. Contrarily, if the Israelis make territorial
concessions and the Palestinians end the violent struggle,
both stand to profit a great deal.
NOTES
1. We acknowledge that different individuals experience the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict (similar to any other real-life conflict) differently. Differential exposure to media, informational gaps, each
person’s unique background in terms of military service, exposure to
terrorist attacks, and many other factors clearly make a difference.
Accordingly, throughout the article, when we write “the same situation” all we mean to say is that this research consistently refers to different views of the one intractable conflict commonly referred to as
“the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict.”
2. It should be stressed that intergroup competitions in these
experiments were not operationalized as two-person games but rather
as team games where each group member decides privately whether
to contribute to the collective group effort. Team games, unlike twoperson games, allow for conflicts of interests within the groups as well
(Bornstein, 2003). However, if one ignores these internal conflicts,
team games are reduced to two-person games.
3. We do not contend that all individuals use game models similarly in perceiving structural relations between groups. Rather, individuals may differ in their tendency to utilize structures of outcome
interdependence to describe real-life intergroup conflicts or even in
their tendency to perceive real-life intergroup conflicts in such terms.
Accordingly, we expect to find meaningful and consistent associations
between the endorsement of games and other conflict-related constructs only for those individuals who show a consistent, consolidated
perception of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in terms of a particular
mixed-motive game.
4. The fact that about one third of the respondents provided
inconsistent responses to the two measures of game endorsement
might reflect individual differences in the tendency to use game
models to describe real-life intergroup conflicts, a desire of some
respondents to balance their responses not to appear too competitive

1687

or too cooperative, or lack of fully consolidated attitudes and perceptions regarding the strategic nature of this conflict. We tried to
minimize misunderstanding of the instructions by having one of the
authors present throughout the data collection, training research
assistants properly, running pretests and various versions of the questionnaire, and so on. However, some inconsistent responses might
reflect limitations of our survey. As Table 3 shows, the interrelations
between research variables other than game endorsement nevertheless formed the expected pattern in both the consistent (CONS) and
the inconsistent (NCONS) groups. This provides some reassurance
that the inconsistent endorsements of the games, as well as the
weaker associations of game endorsement with these variables in the
NCONS group, were not caused by lack of attention or carelessness
in responding because these also would have affected the interrelations between other variables.
REFERENCES
Abelson, R. P., Aronson, E., McGuire, W. J., Newcomb, T. M.,
Rosenberg, M. J., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1968). Theories of cognitive
consistency: A sourcebook. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D. J., & Sanford, R. N.
(1950). The authoritarian personality. New York: Harper.
Allison, S. T., Beggan, J. K., & Midgley, E. H. (1996). The quest for
“similar instances” and “simultaneous possibilities”: Metaphors in
social dilemma research. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
71, 479-497.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. New York: Addison-Wesley.
Altemeyer, B. (1981). Right-wing authoritarianism. Winnipeg, Canada:
University of Manitoba Press.
Altemeyer, B. (1988). Enemies of freedom. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Altemeyer, B. (1998). The other “authoritarian personality.” In
M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 30,
pp. 47-92). New York: Academic Press.
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human categorization.
Psychological Review, 98, 409-429.
Axelrod, R. (1984). The evolution of cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Barnea, M. F., & Schwartz, S. H. (1998). Values and voting. Political
Psychology, 19, 17-40.
Bar-Tal, D., Krugalnski, A. W., & Klar, Y. (1989). Conflict termination: An
epistemological analysis of international cases. Political Psychology, 10,
233-255.
Beit-Hallahmi, B., & Argyle, M. (1997). The psychology of religious behavior, belief & experience. London: Routledge.
Bornstein, G. (1992). The free rider problem in intergroup conflicts
over step-level and continuous public goods. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 62, 597-606.
Bornstein, G. (2003). Intergroup conflict: Individual, group and collective interests. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7, 129-145.
Bornstein, G., & Gilula, Z. (2003). The effect of between group communication on conflict resolution in the assurance and chicken
team games. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 47, 326-339.
Bornstein, G., Mingelrin, D., & Rutte, C. (1996) The effects of withingroup communication on group decision and individual choice in
the assurance and chicken team games. Journal of Conflict Resolution,
40, 486-501.
Brewer, M. B. (1999). The psychology of prejudice: Ingroup love or
outgroup hate? Journal of Social Issues, 55, 429-435.
Brown, R. (2000). Social identity theory: Past achievements, current
problems and future challenges. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 30, 745-778.
Campbell, D. T. (1972) On the genetics of altruism and the counterhedonic components in human culture. Journal of Social Issues, 3,
21-37.
Chambers, J. R., Baron, R. S., & Inman, M. L. (2006). Misperception
in intergroup conflict: Disagreeing about what we disagree about.
Psychological Science, 17, 38-45.
Chomsky, N. (1980). On binding. Linguistic Inquiry, 11, 1-46.
Cohen, G. L. (2003). Party over policy: The dominating of group
impact on political beliefs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
85, 808-822.

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

1688

PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN

Colman, A. M. (1999). Game theory and its applications (2nd ed.). New
York: Routledge.
Coser, L. A. (1956). The functions of social conflict. New York: Free Press.
Cozzolino, P. J., Staples, A. D., Meyers, L. S., & Samboceti, J. (2004).
Greed, death and values: From terror management to transcendence management theory. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
30, 278-292.
De Dreu, C. K. W., & Boles, T. L. (1998). Share and share alike or winner take all? The influence of social value orientation upon choice
and recall of negotiation heuristics. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 76, 253-276.
De Dreu, C. K. W., & Carnevale, P. J. (2003). Motivational bases of
information processing and strategy in conflict and negotiation.
In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
35, pp. 235-291). New York: Academic Press.
De Dreu, C. K. W., & McCusker, C. (1997). Gain-loss frames and
cooperation in two-person social dilemmas: A transformational
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 1093-1106.
Duckitt, J., & Fisher, K. (2003). The impact of social threat on worldview and ideological attitudes. Political Psychology, 24, 199-222.
Duckitt, J., Wagner, C., du Plessis, I., & Birum, I. (2002). The psychological bases of ideology and prejudice: Testing a dual model
process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 75-93.
Eckhardt, W. (1991). Authoritarianism. Political Psychology, 12, 97-124.
Feldman, S. (2003). Enforcing social conformity: A theory of authoritarianism. Political Psychology, 24, 41-74.
Feldman, S., & Stenner, K. (1997). Perceived threat and authoritarianism. Political Psychology, 18, 741-770.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Fiske, A. P. (1992). The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework for
a unified theory of social relations. Psychological Review, 99, 689-723.
Fiske, S. T. (2002). What we know now about bias and intergroup conflict, the problem of the century. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 11, 123-128.
Fox, J. (2004). Religion and state failure: An examination of the
extent and magnitude of religious conflict from 1950 to 1996.
International Political Science Review, 25, 55-76.
Golec, A., & Federico, C. M. (2004). Understanding responses to
political conflict: Interactive effects of the need for closure and
salient conflict schemas. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
87, 750-762.
Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., & Pyszczynski, T. (1997). Terror management theory of self-esteem and cultural worldviews: Empirical
assessments and conceptual refinements. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 29, pp. 61-139). New
York: Academic Press.
Halevy N., Bornstein, G., Sagiv, L., & Roccas, S. (2004, August). A tale
of two groups: The many faces of (the same) intergroup conflict.
Presented at the 28th International Congress of Psychology,
Beijing, China.
Halevy, N., Bornstein, G., Sagiv, L., & Roccas, S. (2005, July). Conflict
templates. Presented at the 8th Jena Workshop on Intergroup
Relations, Jena, Germany.
Hewstone, M., Rubin, M., & Willis, H. (2002). Intergroup bias.
Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 575-604.
Insko, C. A., & Schopler, J. (1987). Categorization, competition, and
collectivity. In C. Hendrick (Ed.), Group processes (Vol. 8, pp. 213251). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Insko, C. A., Schopler, J., Drigotas, S. M., Graetz, K. A., Kennedy,
K., Cox, J., et al. (1993). The role of communication in intergroupinterindividual discontinuity. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 37,
108-138.
Insko, C. A., Schopler, J., Gaertner, L., Wildschut, T., Kozar, R., Pinter,
B., et al. (2001). Interindividual-intergroup discontinuity reduction through the anticipation of future interaction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 95-111.
Insko, C. A., Schopler, J., Hoyle, R, Dardis, G., & Graetz, K. A. (1990).
Individual-group discontinuity as a function of fear and greed.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 68-79.
Jervis, R. (1978). Cooperation under the security dilemma. World Politics,
30, 167-186.

Joireman, J. A., Van Lange, P. A. M., Kuhlman, D. M., Van Vugt, M.,
& Shelley, G. P. (1997). An interdependence analysis of commuting decisions. European Journal of Social Psychology, 27, 441-463.
Jost, J. T., Blount, S., Pfeffer, J., & Hunyady, G. (2003). Fair market
ideology: Its cognitive-motivational underpinnings. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 25, 53-91.
Jost, J. T., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A. W., & Sulloway, F. J. (2003).
Political conservatism as motivated social cognition. Psychological
Bulletin, 129, 339-375.
Kelley, H. H. (1979). Personal relationships: Their structures and processes.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kelley, H. H. (1997). The “stimulus field” for interpersonal phenomena: The source of language and thought about interpersonal
events. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 1, 140-169.
Kelley, H. H., Holmes, J. G., Kerr, N. L., Reis, H. T., Rusbult, C. E., &
Van Lange, P. A. M. (2003). An atlas of interpersonal situations. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Kelley, H. H., & Thibaut, J. W. (1978). Interpersonal relations: A theory of
interdependence. New York: John Wiley.
Kiyonari, T., Tanida, S., & Yamagishi, T. (2000). Social exchange and
reciprocity: Confusion or a heuristic? Evolution and Human
Behavior, 21, 411-427.
Kosterman, R., & Feshbach, S. (1989). Towards a measure of patriotic
and nationalistic attitudes. Political Psychology, 10, 257-274.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1989). Lay epistemics and human knowledge: Cognitive
and motivational basis. New York: Plenum.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1996). Motivated social cognition: Principles of the
interface In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 493-522). New York: Guilford.
Kruglanski, A. W., & Webster, D. M. (1996). Motivated closing of the
mind: “Seizing” and “freezing”. Psychological Review, 103, 263-283.
Landau, M. J., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., Martens, A.,
Goldenberg, J. L., et al. (2004). A function of form: Terror management and structuring the social world. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 87, 190-210.
LeVine, R. A., & Campbell, D. T. (1972). Ethnocentrism: Theories of conflict, ethnic attitudes and group behavior. New York: John Wiley.
Liberman, V., Samuels, S. M., & Ross, L. (2004). The name of the
game: Predictive power of reputations versus situational labels in
determining Prisoner’s Dilemma game moves. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1175-1185.
Liebrand, W. B. G., Jansen, R.W.T.L., Rijken, V. M., & Suhre, C. J. M.
(1986). Might over morality: Social values and the perception of
other players in experimental games. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 22, 203-215.
Liebrand, W. B. G., Wilke, H. A. M., Vogel, R., & Wolters, F. J. M.
(1986). Value orientation and conformity: A study using three types
of social dilemma games. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 30, 77-97.
Luce, R. D., & Raiffa, H. (1957). Games and decisions: Introduction and
critical survey. New York: John Wiley.
Majeski, S., & Fricks, S. (1995). Conflict and cooperation in international relations. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 39, 622-646.
McFarland, S. G. (2005). On the eve of war: Authoritarianism, social
dominance and American students’ attitudes toward attacking
Iraq. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 360-367.
Mummendey, A., Klink, A., & Brown, R. (2001). Nationalism and
patriotism: National identification and outgroup rejection. British
Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 159-172.
Plous, S. (1985). Perceptual illusions and military realities: The
nuclear arms race. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 29, 363-389.
Plous, S. (1987). Perceptual illusions and military realities: Results
from a computer-simulated arms race. Journal of Conflict Resolution,
31, 5-33.
Poundstone, W. (1992). Prisoner’s Dilemma. New York: Anchor Books.
Powell, R. (1989). Nuclear deterrence and the strategy of limited
retaliation. American Political Science Review, 83, 503-519.
Rapoport, A., & Bornstein, G. (1987). Intergroup competition for the
provision of binary public goods. Psychological Review, 94, 291-299.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. M. (1965). Prisoner’s Dilemma: A study
in conflict and cooperation. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. M. (1966). The game of chicken.
American Behavioral Scientist, 10, 10-28.

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

Halevy et al. / PERCEIVING INTERGROUP CONFLICT
Roccas, S., Klar, Y., & Liviatan, I. (in press). The paradox of groupbased guilt: Modes of national identification, conflict vehemence,
and reactions to the ingroup’s moral violations. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology.
Roy, D. (1994). North Korea and the “madman” theory. Security
Dialogue, 25, 307-316.
Schatz, R. T., & Staub, E. (1997). Manifestations of blind and constructive patriotism: Personality correlates and individual-group
relations. In D. Bar-Tal & E. Staub (Eds.), Patriotism in the lives of
individuals and nations. New York: Nelson-Hall.
Schelling, T. C. (1980). The strategy of conflict (2nd ed.). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Schopler, J., Insko, C. A., Wieselquist, J., Pemberton, M., Witcher, B.,
Kozar, R., et al. (2001). When groups are more competitive than
individuals: The domain of the discontinuity effect. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 632-644.
Shamir, J., & Shamir, M. (2000). The anatomy of public opinion. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Sherif, M. (1966). In common predicament: Social psychology of intergroup
conflict and cooperation. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Sherif, M., Harvey, L. J., White, B. J., Hood, W. R., & Sherif, C. W.
(1961). The Robber’s Cave Experiment: Intergroup conflict and cooperation. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Skyrms, B. (2004). The stag hunt and the evolution of social structure. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. (2003). A duplex theory of hate: Development and
application to terrorism, massacres and genocide. Review of General
Psychology, 7, 299-328.
Struch, N., & Schwartz, S. H. (1989). Intergroup aggression: Its predictors and distinctness from ingroup bias. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 56, 364-373.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. (1979). An integrative theory of inter-group
conflict. In W. G. Austin & S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology
of intergroup relations (pp. 33-47). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In S. Worchel & W. G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of
intergroup relations (pp. 7-24). Chicago: Nelson-Hall.

1689

Turner, J. C. (1999). Some current issues in research on social identity and self-categorization theories. In N. Ellemers, R. Spears, &
B. Doosje (Eds.), Social identity: Context, commitment, content
(pp. 6-34). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Van Hiel, A., Pandelaere, M., & Duriez, B. (2004). The impact of
need for closure and conservative beliefs and racism: Differential
mediation by authoritarian submission and authoritarian dominance. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 824-837.
Van Lange, P. A. M. (1999). The pursuit of joint outcomes and equality in outcomes: An integrative model of social value orientation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 337-349.
Van Lange, P. A. M. (2004). From generosity to aggression:
Five interpersonal orientations relevant to social dilemmas. In
R. Suleiman, D. V. Budescu, I. Fischer, & D. M. Messick (Eds.),
Contemporary psychological research on social dilemmas (pp. 3-23). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Van Lange, P. A. M., & Kuhlman, D. M. (1994). Social value orientations and impressions of partner’s honesty and intelligence: A test
of the might versus morality effect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 67, 126-141.
Van Vugt, M., Meertens, R. M., & Van Lange, P. A. M. (1995). Car versus public transportation? The role of social value orientations in
a real-life social dilemma. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 25,
258-278.
Weber, J. M., Kopelman, S., & Messick, D. M. (2004). A conceptual
review of decision making in social dilemmas: Applying a logic of
appropriateness. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 281-304.
White, J. B., & Langer, E. J. (1999). Horizontal hostility: Relations
between similar minority groups. Journal of Social Issues, 55,
537-559.
Wit, A. P., & Kerr, N. L. (2002). “Me versus just us versus us all” categorization and cooperation in nested social dilemmas. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 616-637.
Received March 20, 2006
Revision accepted June 5, 2006

Downloaded from http://psp.sagepub.com at Bessemerstrasse 3 on April 14, 2009

