See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	https://www.researchgate.net/publication/49846167

The	Stroop	effect	and	the	myth	of
automaticity
Article		in		Psychonomic	Bulletin	&	Review	·	June	1997
Impact	Factor:	2.99	·	DOI:	10.3758/BF03209396	·	Source:	PubMed

CITATIONS

READS

191

747

3	authors,	including:
Derek	Besner

Jennifer	A	Stolz

University	of	Waterloo

University	of	Waterloo

192	PUBLICATIONS			6,040	CITATIONS			

48	PUBLICATIONS			1,354	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

All	in-text	references	underlined	in	blue	are	linked	to	publications	on	ResearchGate,
letting	you	access	and	read	them	immediately.

SEE	PROFILE

Available	from:	Derek	Besner
Retrieved	on:	10	May	2016

Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
1997,4 (2), 221-225

BRIEF REPORTS
The Stroop effect and the myth of automaticity
DEREK BESNER, JENNIFER A. STOLZ, and CLAY BOUTIUER
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
A widespread view in cognition is that once acquired through extensive practice, mental skills
such as reading are automatic. Lexical and semantic analyses of single words are said to be uncontrollable in the sense that they cannot be prevented. Over the past 60 years, apparently convincing
support for this assumption has come from hundreds of experiments in which skilled readers have
processed an irrelevant word in the Stroop task despite explicit instructions not to, even when so
doing would hurt color identification performance. This basic effect was replicated in two experiments, which also showed that a considerable amount of semantic processing is locally controlled
by elements of the task. For example, simply coloring a single letter instead of the whole word eliminated the Stroop effect. This outcome flies in the face of any automaticity account in which specified processes cannot be prevented from being set in motion, but it is consistent with the venerable
idea that mental set is a powerful determinant of performance.

Many low-level human behaviors are automatic, in that
a stimulus serves to elicit the behavior in the absence of
conscious awareness or intention (e.g., an eye blink in response to a puff of air; the patellar reflex; the Babinski
reflex), Learned behaviors such as reading are also widely
argued to be automatic in a similar sense. For example, it
is well established that identifying the color of an incongruent word (e.g., green letters spelling the word "red")
is slower than identifying the color of a congruent word
(e.g., green letters spelling the word "green"). This
Stroop effect (Stroop, 1935) and its many variants have
been explored empirically, theoretically, and computationally by cognitive and developmental psychologists,
psycholinguists, neuropsychologists, and cognitive scientists in more than 500 papers over the past 60 years
(see MacLeod's 1991 review). A core assumption of virtually all the theoretical accounts is that skilled readers
process the irrelevant word without consciousness or intent. Reading the word is said to be automatic in the
sense that readers cannot refrain from computing the
meaning of the word despite explicit instructions not to
do SO:I

Stroop effect. ... knowing about this effect is no protection-the processes are not open to control.
(Reisberg, 1997, p. 603)
A fail-safe demonstration of automaticity, in particular
the automatic nature of accessing word meaning, involves
the Stroop task.
(Ashcraft, 1994, p. 72)
the Stroop effect demonstrates that both the name and
meaning of a word are processed by skilled readers even
when they are trying hard not to process them.
(Rayner & Pollatsek, 1989, p. 72)

The working assumption adopted here is that the received theoretical interpretation is unappealing because
the conclusion that reading in this task is "automatic" is
uncalled for. Many of the mental processes that humans
engage in operate outside awareness, but that fact need
not in itself make such processing inevitable. Our perspective is an old one: mental "set" determines the kind
and extent of processing that is engaged. In particular,
the notion that we favor here is that of mental set serving
to bias processing at different levels in multilevel models
(e.g., letter level, word level, semantic level):

Reading is such an automatic process that it is difficult to
inhibit and it will interfere with processing other information about the word.
(Anderson, 1995, p. 100)

Attention-like effects can be produced which greatly
change the distribution of activation across the network,
and in particular, the role of different levels of representation in the network, simply by biasing the gain between
levels, without any structural reorganization.
(Henderson, 1987, P 190)

the automatization of word recognition allows much
quicker reading ... but also leaves us vulnerable to the
This work was supported by Grants A0998, OGPO183905, and
EQPOI87220 from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada. Correspondence should be addressed to D. Besner,
Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON,
Canada N2L 3G 1 (e-mail: dbesner@watarts.uwaterloo.ca).

The experiments reported here are new; they provide
a demonstration that a simple manipulation adapted from
the study of putative automatic processes in the related
domain of semantic priming during reading can serve to

221

Copyright 1997 Psychonomic Society, Inc.

222

BESNER, STOLZ, AND BOUTILIER

drastically reduce (Experiment 1) and even eliminate
(Experiment 2) the Stroop effect in a variant of Stroop's
(1935) original task.

Semantic Priming Revisited
Many ofus regularly fail to note parallels between only
slightly different domains of investigation. The relevant
example here is that "automatic" semantic priming as it
is seen in lexical decision when subjects simply read the
prime (see Neely's 1991 review) can be drastically reduced, and even eliminated, if subjects are required to
perform a letter search on the prime before responding to
the target (see, e.g., Smith, Theodor, & Franklin, 1983).
The interpretation favored in the present paper is that the
letter search prime task initiates a block between serially
organized lexical and semantic levels ofprocessing which
acts to preserve activation in aid of explicit letter identification through feedback from the lexical level. The result is that lexical level processing (as indexed by repetition and morphemic priming) is preserved, but semantic
priming is either drastically reduced in magnitude or
eliminated (Friedrich, Henik, & Tzelgov, 1991; Stolz &
Besner, 1996, in press).
This reduction/elimination of semantic priming has
been reported repeatedly in the literature, beginning over
a decade ago. Despite this, the implications for understanding whether semantic processing of the irrelevant
word in the context of the Stroop task can be described
as automatic (i.e., cannot be prevented) have gone virtually unnoticed.? Indeed, MacLeod (1991) argued that the
"real strength of automaticity theories lies in their ability to capture priming situations" and then noted that in
Posner and Snyder's (1975) account, "priming occurs
through the automatic spread ofactivation, essentially the
same mechanism used to explain (Stroop) interference."
To reiterate, the published literature has not explicitly
made the connection between the reduction/elimination
of semantic priming in lexical decision following letter
search on the prime and the potentially negative implications that this result has for the widespread view that
computing the meaning of the irrelevant word in the context of the Stroop task is automatic. The present experiments address this issue directly.
Predictions
The predictions are straightforward. If the received
view of automatic processing in Stroop-type experiments
is correct, the irrelevant word will always be processed
to the semantic level in skilled readers. Consequently,
whether only a single letter or the entire word is colored
should not affect the magnitude of the Stroop effect. In
contrast, if the requirement to identify the color of a single letter is detrimental to processing the word to the semantic level, as suggested by the results of related experiments in the semantic priming paradigm discussed
above, the magnitude of the Stroop effect in the letter
condition should be smaller than in a condition in which
all the letters are colored.

A pseudohomophone condition which consisted of
letter strings like "bloo" was included to (1) assess the
idea that the Stroop effect is normally larger for words
than for the pseudohomophones (as would be expected if
an orthographic code plays a role in word recognition),
and (2) to determine whether the single-letter condition
also served to impair semantic processing for pseudohomophones.

EXPERIMENT 1
Method
Subjects. Sixty-four undergraduates from the University of Waterloo were tested individually and paid $4.00 each for their participation.
Stimuli. The stimuli consisted of the individual words red, blue,
yellow, and green and their phonologically equivalent counterparts,
wred, bloo, yeloe, and grene, displayed in lowercase on a color monitor. On half the trials, the stimuli were congruent (the color and the letter string referred to the same color), and on the remaining trials, they
were incongruent. All congruent and incongruent color-letter-string
pairings were utilized, The experiment was programmed in MEL
(Schneider, 1988) on an IBM 486-66 computer with a color monitor.
The four colors used (and their corresponding MEL codes) were red
(RGB 42,0,0), blue (RGB 0, 0, 42), green (RGB 0, 42, 0), and yellow (RGB 63, 63, 21).
Procedure. On each trial, the subjects were presented with a single stimulus in the middle of the screen and were told to ignore the letter string and to identify which of the four colors it appeared in quickly
and accurately. The subjects responded by pressing the appropriate
color on the keyboard: the "z." "x," " > ," and "?" keys, which were
covered, respectively, by red, blue, yellow, and green paper.
On half the trials, the entire letter string appeared in red, blue,
green, or yellow. On the other half of the trials, only a single letter was
red, blue, green, or yellow: the remaining letters appeared in gray
(RGB 42, 42, 42). The position of the single colored letter was chosen in order to ensure that different letter positions were sampled and
balanced across congruent and incongruent pairings. Each subject
saw a different random order of288 test trials (36 trials in each of the
8 conditions), which were preceded by 72 practice trials whose composition mirrored the test trials.

Results
The correct reaction time (RT) data for each subject in
each condition were trimmed to eliminate outliers with
the use of the Van Selst and Jolicoeur (1994) procedure;
2,5% of the data were discarded as a result. The remaining
RT data (expressed as means) and associated error rates
can be seen in Table 1.
Table 1
Mean Reaction Times (Milliseconds) and Error
Rates for Identifying Color, as a Function
of Conditions in Experiment 1
All Letters Colored

Single Letter Colored

Pairing

RT

%E

RT

%E

Incongruent
Congruent
Difference

789
686
103

Words
4.4
2.3
2. I

793
721
72

4.8
3.3
1.5

Incongruent
Congruent
Difference

756
689
67

Pseudohomophones
3.7
3.2
0.5

779
729
50

3.9
3.8
0.1

NONAUTOMATIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL

A 2 (congruent vs. incongruent) X 2 (color level: all
letters colored vs. single letter colored) X 2 (string type:
words vs. pseudohomophones) analysis of variance was
carried out on these RT data. Congruent trials were faster
than incongruent trials [F(l,63) = 142.0, MS e = 4,693,
P < .001], and displays that were all colored were responded to faster overall than displays with only a single
colored letter [F(I,63) = 26.1, MSe = 3,183,p < .001].
The main effect of string type was marginal [F(l,63) =
3.6, MSe = 2,935, p < .10], with words being slower
overall than pseudohomophones. Two interactions were
significant: There was a larger Stroop effect for words
than for pseudohomophones [congruency X string type,
F(l,63) = 11.8, MS e = 2,348, P < .001], and there was
a larger Stroop effect when the entire stimulus display
was colored than when only a single letter was colored
[congruency X color level, F(l ,63) = 4.6, MS e = 4,340,
P < .05]. Neither the remaining two-way interaction nor
the three-way interaction was significant (F = 1). Nothing in the pattern of the error data vitiated the pattern observed in the RT data.

Discussion
The results from Experiment I are quite clear. The single-coloredletter condition produced a significantly smaller Stroop effect than did
the all-colored-word condition. If words are always read automatically
in such a way that they activate the semantic level, the single-letter
condition should have produced as much of a Stroop effect as did the
whole-word condition. The fact that it produced a smaller Stroop effect suggests that the automatic reading hypothesis which has prevailed over the last six decades is too strong. ]
The second finding is that the words yielded a larger Stroop effect
than did the pseudohomophones, replicating previous work by Dennis
and Newstead (1981). This result is consistent with the claim that
phonological coding is not the only basis for computing semantics;
orthography also plays a role. However, this experiment is not sufficiently analytic to determine whether orthography serves to activate
semantics (independent of phonology), whether it plays a role after
semantic activation, or whether it plays a role both before and after semantic activation.

EXPERIMENT 2
The results of Experiment 1 are satisfactory to the extent that they show a reduction in the magnitude of the
Stroop effect when only a single letter is colored as compared with when the whole word is colored. This observation is sufficient to undermine the strong version of the
automatic reading hypothesis that has dominated theoretical thinking. Still, these results are not entirely in line
with the results from experiments in which subjects
made a lexical decision to a target string following letter
search on the prime, because in all of those experiments,
the semantic priming effect was virtually eliminated.
There are many possible accounts of this between-task
difference, but here we will focus on the argument that the
Stroop effect is quite sensitive to a constituent condition-namely, the presence of congruent trials (see, e.g.,
Lowe & Mitterer, 1982; Tzelgov, Henik, Sneg, & Baruch,
1996). The problem with including congruent trials is that
they encourage subjects to read the irrelevant word (see

223

MacLeod & McDonald [1995] for such evidence).
Moreover, it is difficult to detect such behavior, because
the subject does not make an overt error on congruent
trials. Instead, the overt response is correct, even though
the wrong dimension is controlling behavior. This reading strategy may be quite unconscious, but it permeates
the entire experiment in that it also makes it harder to ignore the irrelevant word on incongruent trials as evidenced by the fact that the interference effect increases
as the proportion of congruent trials increases (see, e.g.,
Tzelgov et aI., 1996).
A better way to examine the automatic reading hypothesis in the context of the Stroop task is to use only
conditions that give subjects no incentive to read the
word. This is accomplished by discarding congruent
trials and comparing the incongruent condition with a
baseline condition. One difficulty here is that the issue of
what constitutes an appropriate baseline has never been
resolved (see, e.g., Neely, 1991). Indeed, some investigators even suggest doing without (Jonides & Mack,
1984; Lindsay & Jacoby, 1994). Given that the experimental design advocated here requires some form of
baseline, we used nonwords. This baseline is more appropriate than the commonly used series ofxxxs because
it is more word-like. Still, we do not argue that it is the
only baseline that should be used (another example
would be a baseline consisting ofwords that are not color
related).
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to demonstrate that
when congruent trials are removed from the experiment
and a neutral baseline is substituted, semantic processing as indexed by the Stroop effect is even more drastically curtailed by the single-letter manipulation than in
Experiment 1.

Method
The stimuli consisted of the same words as in Experiment I, the
same colors, the same procedure, and the same equipment. The only
difference was that all the pseudohomophones were discarded, as
were all the congruent stimuli. Neutral stimuli consisting of the nonwords ret, yenile, grend, and blat replaced the congruent stimuli.
These controls were chosen to match the incongruent stimuli on
length and on the first two letters, given the repeated worry that a
Stroop effect can result simply from the first two letters spelling a
color word (see, e.g., Tzelgov et al., 1996).
The experiment now consisted of 144 randomly ordered trials (36
trials in each of the 4 conditions), which were preceded by 36 practice
trials that mirrored the composition of the test trials. A new set of64
subjects was recruited from the same population as in Experiment I;
they were tested individually, and each was paid $4.00.

Table 2
Mean Reaction Times (Milliseconds) and Error
Rates to Identify Color as a Function
of Conditions in Experiment 2
All Letters Colored

Single Letter Colored

Pairing

RT

%E

RT

%E

Incongruent
Neutral

777
743
34

29
2.4
0.5

783
784
-1

2.9
3.0
-0.1

Difference

224

BESNER, STOLZ, AND BOUTILIER

Results
The same screening procedure for outliers as used in
Experiment I led to 2.9% of the correct RTs being discarded. The remaining RT data (expressed as means) and
associated error rates can be seen in Table 2.
A 2 (incongruent vs. neutral) X 2 (color level: single
letter vs, all letters) analysis of variance was carried out
on these RT data. This analysis yielded a main effect of
incongruent versus neutral trials [F(l,63) = 6.3, MSe =
2,791, P < .02] and a main effect of the single-Iettercolored versus all-letters-colored contrast [F(I,63) = 13.8,
MSe = 2,459, P < .001], as well as an interaction in
which the Stroop effect was smaller in the single-letter
condition than in the whole-word condition [F(l ,63) =
6.7, MSe = 3,019,p < .02]. Nothing in the error data vitiated the pattern observed in the RT data.

semantic level despite instructions to the contrary. To put it another
way, the literal context is more powerful than the instructions to ignore
the word; the context reinstantiates reading in the sense of enabling a
set of mental structures and the pathways that connect them. In the
memory literature. this is referred to as "transfer appropriate processing" (e.g., Roediger, 1990). Nonetheless, as the present experiments
show, at least some of these putatively automatic reading processes
can be interfered with so that the Stroop effect is reduced (Experiment I), and even eliminated (Experiment 2). The ability to produce
this outcome would seem to fly in the face of any automaticity account
in which specified processes cannot be prevented from being initiated.
More generally, the premature classification of some mental behaviors as automatic may discourage attempts to understand the underlying processes by providing a ready made explanation. At the
same time, reinvoking the concept of "set" invites us to struggle with
unresolved, but important and difficult, questions. How is set implemented and controlled in an unconscious, biological form of mind?
And by what agent or committee?

REFERENCES

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 are clear. There was a 34-msec Stroop
effect in the whole-word condition, and no Stroop effect (-I msec) in
the single-letter condition.f Eliminating the congruent trials and substituting neutral ones appears to make it possible for semantic level
processing to be curtailed even more dramatically than in Experiment 1.
The results of Experiment 2 are again inconsistent with the widespread view reiterated in over 500 journal articles, chapters, and textbooks that a Stroop effect occurs because unconscious/automatic
processes cannot be prevented from computing the semantics of the irrelevant word. This result is also problematic for an implemented
"connectionist" account of the Stroop effect (Cohen, Dunbar, & MeClelland, 1990; Cohen, Servan-Schreiber, & McClelland, 1992) because the model does not appear to have a way to produce the present
result. It is of course possible to modify the assumptions that were
made and/or add new components to the architecture. We look forward to such modifications, because implementing even a few forms
of mental set in a network model is likely to make an important contribution to our understanding of cognitive processes. Such modifications would be particularly useful if, at the same time, they also provided an account ofboth the reduction/elimination of semantic priming
on the one hand, and the preservation of morphemic priming in lexical decision on the other, as discussed in the introduction.
Our account of the data from Experiments I and 2 is the same as the
one we have offered for the related disappearance of semantic priming in lexical decision following letter search on the prime (Besner &
Stolz, 1995; Chiappe, Smith, & Besner, 1996; Stolz & Besner, 1996,
in press). Explicit processing of a letter's form or color in the context
of a word is associated with letter and lexical level activation that is
blocked from flowing strongly to the semantic level. Instead, lexical
level activation feeds back to the letter level to enhance processing
there. If this account is correct, it implies that activation in the word
recognition system is limited; otherwise there would be no need to
block it. We note that the idea of activation as a limited resource has
also been promulgated elsewhere (e.g., Anderson, 1976).

GENERAL DISCUSSION
Whether the specific explanation advanced here and elsewhere for
related phenomena is correct is less important than the general conclusion to be drawn from these two experiments. Contrary to the view
expressed repeatedly over the past 60 years in the Stroop literature, at
least some aspects of word recognition are not automatic. Specifically,
the present results are consistent with the claim that it is possible to
prevent the computation of semantics. The hundreds of previous
demonstrations of a Stroop effect which involved semantic processing
occurred because, on the view favored here, subjects fell back (albeit
unconsciously) on the default mental set of processing the word to the

ANDERSON, J. (1976). Language. memorv. and thought. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
ANDERSON, J. (1995). Cognitive psychology and its implications. New
York: W. H. Freeman.
ASHCRAFT. M. H. (1994). Human memory and cognition. Harper
Collins.
BESNER, D., & STOLZ, J. A (1995). The myth of automaticity. Paper
presented to the 36th annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
Los Angeles.
CHEESMAN, J., & MERIKLE. P. M. (1985). Word recognition and consciousness. In D. Besner, T. G. Waller, & E. McKinnon (Eds.),
Reading research: Advances in theory and practice (pp. 311-352).
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
CHIAPPE, P. R., SMITH, M. c., & BESNER, D. (1996). Semantic priming
in visual word recognition: Activation blocking and domains of processing. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3, 249-253.
COHEN, J. D.• DUNBAR, K., & MCCLELLAND, J. L. (1990). On the control of automatic processes: A parallel distributed processing account of the Stroop effect. Psychological Review, 97, 332-361.
COHEN, J. D., SERVAN-SCHREIBER, D., & MCCLELLAND, J. L. (1992). A
parallel distributed processing approach to automaticity. American
Journal ofPsychology, 105,239-241.
DENNIS, I., & NEWSTEAD, S. E. (198 I). Is phonological recodingunder
strategic control? Memory & Cognition, 9, 472-477.
FRIEDRICH. F. J., HENIK, A, & TZELGov, J. (1991). Automatic processes in lexical access and spreading activation. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 17, 792806.
GLASER, M. 0., & GLASER, W. R. (1982). Time course analysis of the
Stroop phenomenon. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance. 8. 875-894.
HENDERSON, L. (1987). Word recognition: A tutorial review. In M. Coltheart (Ed.), Attention and performance XI/: The psychology of
reading (pp. 171-200). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
HENIK, A., FRIEDRICH. F. J., & KELLOGG, W. A (1983). The dependence of semantic relatedness effects upon prime processing. Memory & Cognition, 11,366-373.
JONIDES, J., & MACK, R. (1984). On the costs and benefits of costs and
benefits. Psychological Bulletin, 96. 29-44.
KAHNEMAN, D., & HENIK,A. (1981). Perceptual organization and attention. In M. Kubovy & J. R. Pomerantz (Eds.), Perceptual organization (pp. 181-211). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
LINDSAY, D. S., & JACOBY, L. L. (1994). Stroop process dissociations:
The relationship between facilitation and interference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 20,
219-234.
LOGAN, G. D., ZBRODOFF, N. J., & WILLIAMSON, J. (1984). Strategies
in the color-word Stroop task. Bulletin ofthe Psychonomic Societv,
22, 135-138.

NONAUTOMATIC MEMORY RETRIEVAL

LOWE, D. G., & MITTERER, J. O. (1982). Selective and divided attention in a Stroop task. Canadian Journal ofPsychology, 36, 684-700.
MACLEOD, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: An integrative review Psychological Bulletin, 109, 163-203.
MACLEOD, C. M., & McDoNALD, P. (1995). Facilitation in the Stroop
task is artifactual. Paper presented at the 36th annual meeting of the
Psychonomic Society, Los Angeles.
MCCANN, R. S., FOLK, C. L., & JOHNSTON, J. C. (1992). The role of
spatial attention in visual word processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 18, 1015-1029.
NEELY, J. H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual word recognition: A selective review of current findings and theories. In
D. Besner & G. W. Humphreys (Eds.), Basic processes in reading:
Visual word recognition (pp. 264-336). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
POSNER, M. 1., & SNYDER, C. R. R. (1975). Attention and cognitive
control. In R. L. Solso (Ed.), Information processing and cognition:
The Loyola Symposium (pp, 55-85). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
RAYNER, K., & POLLATSEK, A. (1989). The psychology ofreading. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
REISBERG, D. (1997). Cognition: Exploring the science of the mind.
New York: Norton.
ROEDIGER, H. L., III (1990). Implicit memory: Retention without remembering. American Psychologist, 45,1043-1056
SCHNEIDER, W. (1988). Micro Experimental Laboratory: An integrated system for IBM PC compatibles. Behavior Research Methods. Instruments. & Computers, 20, 206-217.
SMITH, M. c, THEODOR, L., & FRANKLIN, P. E. (1983). On the relationship between contextual facilitation and depth of processing.
Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Learning. Memory. & Cognition, 9, 697-712.
STOLZ, J. A., & BESNER, D. (1996). The role of set in visual word
recognition: Activation and activation blocking as nonautomatic
processes. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Human Perception
& Performance, 22, I 166-1 177.
STOLZ, J. A., & BESNER, D. (in press). Levels of representation in visual word recognition: A dissociation between morphemic and semantic processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance.
STROOP, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions.
Journal ofExperimental Psychology, 18, 643-661.
TZELGOV, J., HENIK, A., SNEG, R, & BARUCH, O. (1996). Unintentional word reading via the phonological route: The Stroop effect
with cross script homophones. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning. Memory, & Cognition, 22, 336-349.
VAN SELST, M., & JOLICOEUR, P. (1994). A solution to the effect of
sample size on outlier elimination. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47A, 631-650.
NOTES

I. The present paper addresses the issue of whether processing can
be said to be automatic in the restricted sense that semantic activation
cannot be prevented. We do not question the claim that (attentional)
strategy effects can be overlaid on the standard Stroop effect (e.g.,
Cheesman & Merikle, 1985; Logan, Zbrodoff, & Williamson, 1984).
2. The closest is a report by Henik, Friedrich, and Kellogg (1983).
In Experiments 3 and 4, they had subjects do a letter search through a
prime display. A colored word appeared following an overt response
to the prime display, and subjects had to identify the color of the word.
There was little evidence that the semantic relation between the prime
word and target word affected the time to identify the color of the

225

word. Note, however, that the target words themselves were not color
words.
3. Kahneman and Henik (1981) reported a finding very similar to
the results of Experiment I, and argued that it followed from the idea
that attention is directed to objects. They concluded that coloring a
single letter in comparison with a whole word serves to render the letter a perceptual object, thus reducing the size of the Stroop effect as
compared with when the word is the perceptual object. There are,
however, several difficulties with both their experiment and their theoretical argument.
The first difficulty is empirical. It is certainly true that Kahneman
and Henik (1981) observed a reduction in the magnitude ofthe Stroop
effect in their RT data for the single-letter condition as compared with
the whole-word condition. Unfortunately, this reduction in the magnitude ofthe Stroop effect was accompanied by a doubling ofthe error
rate. This apparent speed-error tradeoff makes such data difficult to
interpret.
The second difficulty is theoretical. Given that the results of the experiments reported here conform to Kahneman and Henik's (1981)
predictions, is their account sufficient? If the repetition, morphemic,
and semantic priming literature discussed in the introduction is considered, we are inclined to the view that it is not. Friederich et al. (1991)
reported that repetition priming is observed for words but not for nonwords following letter search on the prime (the same condition that
eliminates semantic priming for words). The argument advanced by
Friederich et al. is that the lexical level of representation is not impaired
by letter search on the prime (hence priming for words but not for nonwords), but that semantic level processing is impaired (hence no semantic priming). It is not obvious how Kahneman and Henik's "perceptual object" account explains this. Relatedly, Stolz and Besner (in
press) reported that morphemic priming was observed in lexical decision following letter search on the prime, but that semantic priming
was not observed in the same experiment. Both the Friederich et al.
and the Stolz and Besner findings seem better suited to an account in
which "attention" (if an account which appeals to attention is needed)
operates hierarchically in this context; lower levels (e.g., letter level,
lexical level) need little or no attention as compared with higher levels (e.g., semantics).
Finally, this hierarchical notion is one way to integrate some of the
data from the spatial cuing literature with the data from the letter
search task, and the data reported here. That is, our hypothesis is that
spatial attention, at least in the context of word recognition, plays a
postlexical role in processing rather than the pre lexical one envisioned
by McCann, Folk, and Johnston (1992). Still, a more definitive answer to these questions awaits further investigation, because it is possible that the correct explanation for the data from the letter search
prime paradigm does not apply to the present version of the Stroop
paradigm, and one or the other of those paradigms might not index
the same operations as the spatial cuing paradigm does.
4. In both of these experiments, the single-letter condition was
slower than the whole-word condition. Some might wonder whether
the Stroop effect was reduced/eliminated because the conflicting semantic information was resolved during the extra time taken to deal
with the single colored letter. Any account of this kind conflicts with
the observation that displaying an incongruent color word prior to a
target color patch still produces a Stroop effect (e.g., Cheesman &
Merikle, 1985; Glaser & Glaser, 1982).

(Manuscript received November 22, 1996;
revision accepted for publication January 31, 1997.)

