NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Vis cogn. 2009 ; 17(1-2): 180–194. doi:10.1080/13506280802211334.

Feature binding in attentive tracking of distinct objects
Tal Makovski1 and Yuhong V. Jiang1,2
1Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota
2Center for Cognitive Sciences, University of Minnesota

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To what degree can attentive tracking of objects’ motion benefit from increased distinctiveness in
the objects’ surface features? To address this question, we asked observers to track 4 moving digits
among a total of 8 moving digits. By varying the distinctiveness of the digits’ color and identity, we
found that tracking performance improved when the 8 objects were all distinct in color, digit identity,
or both, compared to when the 8 objects were identical. However, when the 8 objects were distinct
in a combination of color and digit but targets and nontargets shared color or digit identity,
performance enhancement was not observed. Four follow-up experiments extended the range of the
feature dimensions generating the effect and ruled out alternative strategic accounts. We conclude
that surface features can be used to enhance tracking performance. This enhancement is featurebased, revealing a limited degree of feature binding in attentive tracking.

Keywords
Multiple-object tracking; attentive tracking; feature and location binding

Introduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The dynamics of the visual environment pose a significant challenge to human vision. How
do we maintain a sense of temporal continuity in a constantly changing environment? One
solution to this computational problem is to track objects as they move. Motion tracking is
easily achieved when a single object must be tracked, or when the tracked objects differ from
the other objects in a salient visual feature. Tracking becomes increasingly difficult when
multiple objects are to be tracked among visually similar nontargets (Pylyshyn & Storm,
1988). In this study we investigate the degree to which attentive tracking can benefit from
distinctiveness in object features. We asked observers to track a subset of moving chromatic
digits and measured their performance as a function of the objects’ distinctiveness in color,
digit identity, and the combination of color and digit identity. The results are informative of
feature binding in attentive tracking. In the following introduction, we review the current state
of knowledge on this topic and identify a critical gap.
Standard multiple-object tracking tasks have deprived participants of the opportunity to use
identity information. In Pylyshyn and Storm’s (1988) original paradigm, observers are shown
a field of identical objects. A subset of these objects are designated as tracking targets during
a cue period, after which the targets and nontargets are identical in shape and surface features.
Tracking is accomplished by processing where the targets are and by updating each target’s
location as it moves. Object identity plays no role in this paradigm.

Correspondence should be sent to Tal Makovski, N218 Elliott Hall, 75 East River Road, Minneapolis, MN 55455. Email: E-mail:
tal.makovski@gmail.com..

Makovski and Jiang

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although it seems that the standard multiple-object tracking task is unrepresentative of
everyday visual activity where moving objects are usually distinct, there are several reasons
why identity information has rarely been incorporated (with the exception of a few studies
reviewed below). First, spatiotemporal properties are used predominantly when visual
continuity must be established. Infants rely primarily on spatiotemporal continuity, rather than
shape or color constancy, to track objects after brief occlusions. At the age of ten-month old,
infants were not surprised when a toy truck moved behind an occluder and reemerged as a toy
duck (Xu & Carey, 1996). Infants also did not treat two objects that differ in surface properties
as separate objects until the objects started to move independently (Spelke, Gutheil, & Van de
Walle, 1995). The heavy reliance on spatiotemporal properties was also observed in visually
deprived individuals who recovered vision as adults. These individuals also initially relied
heavily on motion continuity to segregate a visual scene and only later incorporated surface
properties such as color or shape discontinuity (Sinha, 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Normal human adults also appear to prefer spatiotemporal information to identity information
in updating visual objects. For example, in the object reviewing paradigm (Kahneman,
Treisman, & Gibbs, 1992), two letters (e.g., A and B) were presented inside two squares
positioned at the 3 and 9 o’clock locations. The letters then disappeared while the squares
moved clockwise to the 6 and 12 o’clock locations. After the motion, a probe letter was
displayed for participants to name as quickly as possible. Participants were faster to name a
formerly presented letter if it appeared in its original square rather than in the other square.
Kahneman et al. (1992) proposed that spatiotemporal continuity served to maintain the integrity
of “object files”, allowing participants to update object information after motion. Interestingly,
object updating appears to rely primarily on spatiotemporal continuity. In a similar paradigm,
if the two letters initially appeared against blue and green background and later the background
switched colors, performance in reporting the previewed letters was unaffected (Mitroff &
Alvarez, 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another reason why researchers have focused primarily on tracking “where” rather than “what”
is because the use of identity information in multiple-object tracking is highly limited. When
objects with different shapes were used and tracking was occasionally interrupted by a question
about the characteristics of a target, observers accurately reported the target’s direction and
speed, but had difficulty reporting its shape (Scholl, Pylyshyn, & Franconeri, 1999). Further
evidence that “what” is poorly bound to “where” comes from a study by Pylyshyn, who
presented different digits, one in each circle in the cue period for participants to remember
(Pylyshyn, 2004). The digits were taken away before the circles began to move. At the end of
the motion period, participants were asked to select the target circles and to report the digit
originally presented in each circle. This paradigm bears some similarity to Kahneman et al.’s
object updating task, except that there were more objects (8 versus 2 moving objects), more
identities (4 vs. 2), more complex motion, and an explicit instruction to bind what with where.
Although participants in Kahneman et al.’s paradigm were able to update the identity of two
objects after a brief rotation of the placeholders, those in Pylyshyn’s more complex task were
unable to do so. Even when they successfully tracked the target circles, memory for the
associated digit identities was poor. Similar failures of “what-to-where” binding have been
observed when participants tracked objects with apparent, rather than continuous, motion
(Saiki, 2003).
Although the binding of what to where is difficult in attentive tracking, some degree of binding
has been demonstrated when distinct objects are used for tracking, and when participants are
explicitly required to bind what to where. The multiple-identity tracking task usually presents
observers with a small number of objects and designate either a subset or the entire set for
tracking. Unlike Pylyshyn’s (2004) task where the distinct identities are presented only during
the cue period, in the multiple-identity tracking task objects are always distinct in shape or

Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

color for the entire tracking period. At the end of the motion period, all objects are masked.
One of the locations is then probed for observers to retrieve the associated object identity
(Oksama & Hyönä, 2004, in press). Observers’ limited ability to bind identities to locations
was dependent upon the speed and number of targets.
Horowitz and colleagues employed a further modification of the multiple-identity tracking
task, investigating whether distinctive identities are addressable during tracking (Horowitz et
al., 2007). Participants were asked to track cartoon animals (e.g., a tiger, a leopard) that moved
in straight lines. The unique identities of the animals remained on the screen during tracking.
At the end of the tracking period the animals hid behind cactuses. Observers were asked to
report either the location of all the targets (standard question) or the location of a specific
animal (specific question). Horowitz et al. found that the estimated capacity was higher when
answering the standard question than when answering the specific question, with a capacity
estimate of about one object in the specific question. From these data Horowitz et al. concluded
that “what” information is accessible during tracking, but only to a limited degree. Consistent
with this idea, tracking performance was higher when the moving animals were distinct rather
than identical to one another (Experiment 5, Horowitz et al., 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The main goal of the present study is to investigate the extent to which attentive tracking can
be enhanced by distinctiveness in object identities. Horowitz et al. showed that tracking
performance is higher when distinct, rather than homogeneous, objects must be tracked.
However, their use of cartoon animals makes it difficult to dissociate the role of visual
distinctiveness from semantic or name distinctiveness. In addition, it is difficult to isolate the
visual features that contribute to tracking of distinct objects observed by Horowitz et al.
(2007). To understand how object features are integrated with their location during tracking,
it is necessary to test tracking of visual objects made of identifiable features.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We conducted a series of five experiments using colored digits (or colored shape/orientation)
to study how distinctiveness in features or conjunction of features affects attentive tracking.
In this article, we report one of the experiments in full and briefly describe the other experiments
that provide converging support for the main findings. In the main experiment, we used an
array of colored digits and asked participants to track a subset of those objects. Unlike the
multiple-identity tracking task, participants of the present study were not required to remember
object identities. Tracking can be achieved entirely by updating the motion trajectories of
objects without remembering their identities. Importantly, we manipulated the objects’
distinctiveness. The objects could be distinct in one or two features (e.g., all have different
colors) or in a combination of features (e.g., the conjunction of color and shape made all objects
unique). We also tested whether all objects or only the target subset needs to be distinct to
facilitate tracking.
Consider two conditions shown in Table 1: the homogeneous condition and the colordistinct condition, where participants tracked 4 out of 8 objects that were either homogeneous
or distinct in color. Motion trajectory tracking is sufficient for both conditions. If
spatiotemporal continuity is the only source of information for attentive tracking, then
performance should be comparable between the homogeneous and color-distinct conditions.
In contrast, if distinctiveness in color is also used to separate targets from nontargets, then
performance may be superior in the color-distinct condition. Similar predictions can be made
when comparing the homogeneous condition with the digit-distinct condition. Furthermore,
the distinctiveness in both color and digit may convey an added advantage in the bothdistinct condition. Thus, the comparison of the homogeneous condition with the color-distinct,
digit-distinct, and both-distinct conditions informs us whether featural information is helpful
for tracking when the task does not require identity memory. An advantage in the feature
distinct conditions may imply that participants can bind a feature with a moving location.

Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Now consider the conjunction-distinct condition, where the 8 objects were made distinctive
because they were distinct in the combination of color and digit shape. For instance, a target
object, such as a blue 3, is the only object that is blue in color and is “3” in shape. In terms of
features, it shares with a distractor (e.g., a blue 4) in color and with another distractor (e.g., a
green 3) in digit identity. If the advantage conveyed by tracking distinct objects over tracking
homogeneous objects operates upon a color-digit integrated object, then it should also enhance
performance in the conjunction-distinct condition. In contrast, if the advantage for tracking
distinct objects emerges primarily from distinguishing features that are not fully integrated
together, then the conjunction-distinct condition may not yield superior performance to the
homogeneous condition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Whether distinctiveness in the conjunction of two features helps attentive tracking is an
interesting question not addressed previously. When objects are static, binding of separate
features to form an integrated object is easily achieved. Indeed, extensive research has shown
that visual attention and visual working memory operate on the basis of integrated objects
(Duncan, 1984; Scholl, 2001). For example, participants can remember all four colors and all
four orientations as well as remembering only four colors or only four orientations, as long as
the colors and orientations conjoin to form four colored oriented lines (Luck & Vogel, 1997).
Feature binding may become much more difficult in attentive tracking, however, where objects
are moving and where a subset of objects is not actively attended (Pylyshyn, 1989; but see
Cavanagh & Alvarez, 2005). In turn, the conjunction-distinct condition may produce
performance similar to one of the paired conditions, where targets and distractors share featural
information (see Table 1, color-paired, digit-paired, and conjunction-paired). Sample trials
can be viewed online at http://jianglab.psych.umn.edu/MOTdigits/MOTdigits.htm.
In short, by comparing performance in the different identity-distinct conditions with the
homogeneous condition, this study informs us how feature binding operates in attentive
tracking.

Method
Participants
All participants were volunteers from the University of Minnesota between 18 and 33 years
old. They all had normal color vision and normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity. 20
participants took part in the main experiment.
Equipment

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Participants were tested individually in a room with normal interior lighting. They sat
approximately 57cm away from a 19” computer monitor. The experiment was programmed
with psychophysical toolbox (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997) implemented in MATLAB
(www.mathworks.com).
Stimuli
The moving objects were colored digits (each fit within a 1.5°×1.5° imaginary square)
presented against a black background. There were eight possible colors (red, green, blue,
yellow, orange, azure, white, and pink) and eight possible digits (1 to 8). The colors and digits
were randomly sampled according to a trial’s condition.
Procedure
Participants were tested in 8 conditions with 15 trials each, presented in a randomly intermixed
order. All conditions used similar trial sequences. Participants pressed the spacebar to initiate
each trial. Eight colored digits were presented at randomly selected locations within an
Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

imaginary presentation window of 21°×21°. Four of the objects were surrounded by white
frames (1.9°×1.9°), which identified their status as tracking targets. After 1330msec, the frames
disappeared and the objects started moving randomly within the presentation window. The
objects moved at a constant speed of 21.9°/s, bounced off the “wall” of the presentation
window, and repelled one another when a minimal center-to-center distance of 2.1° was
reached. Participants were asked to track the cued targets and were encouraged to maintain
central fixation during tracking. After the objects moved for 7 seconds and stopped, they all
turned to white disks (1.5° in diameter). Participants were asked to click on the four targets.
The correctly selected targets turned green while the missed targets turned red to provide
feedback for 1 second.
Design
The eight conditions differed in the distinctness of identity (Table 1). All eight objects were
identical in the homogenous condition (e.g., they were all red 2s); the exact color and digit
identity was randomly selected on each trial of that condition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

There were four “distinct” conditions. The eight objects were uniform in digit identity but
distinct in color in the color-distinct condition (e.g., they were all 4s, but in 8 different colors).
The objects were the same in color but distinct in digit identity in the digit-distinct condition
(e.g., they were all red, but in 8 different digit identities). Or the objects were distinct in both
color and digit identity in the both-distinct condition (e.g., all 8 digits and all 8 colors were
used in random combination). The conjunction-distinct condition involved distinct objects
produced by the conjunction of four colors and four digits. In this condition, no two objects
were the same in the combination of color and digit, but a given target (e.g., a blue 3) always
shared color with one of the distractors (e.g., a blue 4) and digit identity with another distractor
(e.g., a green 3).
Finally, there were three “paired” conditions in which all four targets were distinct and all four
distractors were distinct, but each of the targets was the same as one of the distractors. In the
color-paired condition, for instance, all objects were the same in digit identity, but the four
targets were distinct in color, and the four distractors were distinct in color, and a target always
shared a distractor’s color. Similarly, in the digit-paired condition, the targets and distractors
were paired in digit identity but each subset was distinct. In the conjunction-paired condition,
the targets and distractors were paired in both digit identity and color, but each subset was
distinct. Note that the conjunction-paired condition included 4 digits and 4 colors which were
paired to make one target identical to one distractor. The conjunction-distinct condition also
included 4 digits and 4 colors, however the features were combined such that all 8 objects were
distinct in color-digit combination.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Results
Figure 1 depicts mean tracking accuracy as a function of stimulus condition in the main
experiment.
(1) Homogeneous versus distinct identities
Does distinctiveness in feature identities enhance tracking? We addressed this question by
comparing performance in the homogeneous, color-distinct, digit-distinct, and both-distinct
conditions using a repeated-measures ANOVA. Distinctiveness in color enhanced
performance, F(1, 19) = 14.60, p < .01, as did distinctiveness in digit identity, F(1, 19) = 6.70,
p < .05. The interaction between color distinctiveness and digit distinctiveness was marginally
significant, F(1, 19) = 3.20, p = .09, as the two factors were slightly under-additive. Pairwise
t-tests showed that each of the three feature-distinct conditions was significantly higher in

Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

accuracy than the homogeneous condition, all ps < .001. These results clearly showed that
attentive tracking was influenced by objects’ distinctive identities, even when participants were
not required to remember what the objects were (see also Horowitz et al., 2007).
Did the enhancement from distinct identities extend to a condition where the objects were
distinct in terms of a combination of color and digit, but not in color or digit alone? Our results
clearly showed that it did not. To the contrary, the conjunction-distinct condition had
significantly lower accuracy than the homogeneous condition, t(19) = 3.30, p < .004. The
accuracy of the conjunction-distinct condition was also significantly lower than any of the three
feature-distinct conditions, all ps < .001.
(2) Homogeneous versus paired identities

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The three paired conditions were designed such that objects had distinct features within each
subset, but one target was always identical to one distractor. In these cases, tracking on the
basis of distinct identity (e.g., a red 7) can only help distinguish between different targets, or
between each specific target and three of the distractors. It does not help distinguish a target
and its paired distractor. Our results showed that accuracy in the paired condition was lower
than the accuracy in the homogeneous condition. The impairment was significant in the digitpaired condition, t(19) = 4.10, p < .001, and the conjunction-paired condition, t(19) = 5.40,
p < .001, but was insignificant in the color-paired condition, t(19) = 1.60, p > .10. These results
suggest that the advantage afforded by distinguishing the target from other targets or from three
of the distractors was outweighed by the disadvantage of confusing the target with an identical
distractor.
(3) Conjunction-distinct vs. conjunction-paired
Both the conjunction-distinct and the conjunction-paired conditions were produced by
conjoining four colors with four digits to form eight objects. The only difference was that the
combination of digits and colors produced eight distinct objects in the former but four pairs of
target-distractor in the latter. Does distinctiveness in feature conjunction produce any
advantage in the former? No, the conjunction-distinct condition was not significantly better
than the conjunction-paired condition, t(19) = 1.30, p > .20.

Follow-up Experiments

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to the main experiment, we conducted four control experiments to verify the
generality of the results. The control experiments were similar in procedure to the main
experiment, so we included a brief description of the methods and results. Descriptive statistics
and p-values for these experiments are provided in Table 2. Our main focus was to show that
objects distinct in feature conjunction (but not in single features) are not tracked better than
homogeneous objects.
Control Experiment 1: variable trial duration
The unpredictable trial duration was used to discourage participants from using a strategy of
not tracking until the final moments of a trial [footnote 1]1. Seven participants were tested in
this experiment which was a replication of the main experiment, except that the duration of
tracking was unpredictable. Each trial ended after 3.0, 3.8, 4.9, 6.3, or 8.0s of motion. Similar
to the main experiment, each distinctiveness condition contained 15 trials, divided randomly
and evenly into the 5 possible trial durations. The basic pattern of results (Table 2) was the
same as the main experiment: distinctness in features enhanced performance but distinctness
in a combination of features did not. Compared with the homogeneous condition, accuracy was
1We thank Todd Horowitz for suggesting this possibility.
Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 7

enhanced in the color-distinct and digit-distinct conditions, ps < .03, but impaired in the
conjunction-distinct condition, p < .02.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Control Experiment 2: Blocked design
This experiment was designed to investigate whether effects of feature and conjunction
distinctiveness held with a blocked (rather than mixed) design. Eleven participants were tested
using colored digits as in the main experiment. They completed five conditions presented in
separate blocks of trials; the order of blocks was randomized. The conditions were
homogeneous, color-distinct, digit-distinct, both-distinct, and conjunction-distinct. There were
15 trials in each condition. Blocking the distinctive conditions did not produce an advantage
in the conjunction-distinct condition compared with the homogeneous condition (p > .40),
which was significantly lower in accuracy than the feature-distinct conditions (ps < .05).
Control Experiment 3: color and novel shapes
Thirteen participants were tested in this experiment where digits were replaced by novel shapes
that were difficult to name. Otherwise the experiment was identical to the main experiment.
Again, the results were qualitatively similar to those of the main experiment. Distinctiveness
in a combination of features failed to facilitate performance compared with the homogeneous
condition, p > .55.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Control Experiment 4: color and line orientations
Line orientation is a simple visual feature that may be better integrated with color than digits
or novel shapes [footnote 2]2. Ten participants were tested in this experiment where 8 oriented
lines (20°-160° in units of 20°) replaced the digits. Still, the use of two simple features (color
and line orientation) did not change the results. The conjunction-distinct condition again did
not yield higher accuracy than the homogeneous condition, p > .43.

Discussion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Everyday visual experience suggests that we track moving objects not only on the basis of their
motion trajectories but also on the basis of their surface features. Our study confirms this
intuition. Attentive tracking of a subset of moving objects was more accurate when all objects
were distinct in color or digit identity than if they were identical in color and digit identity. The
enhancement by distinctive features was confined to conditions where at least a single feature
differentiated all objects, as when all objects had different colors, but not when a combination
of features differentiated all objects. In addition, even when the targets were distinct from one
another, tracking was not enhanced if the distractors shared the targets’ colors or digit identities.
Four follow-up experiments demonstrated the robustness of these effects by ruling out strategic
biases (Control experiments 1-2) and by extending the range of the dimensions generating the
effect (Control experiments 3-4). Together these findings have significant implications for
feature binding in attentive tracking.
First, the finding that distinctiveness in features enhances tracking apparently contradicts
previous results, where participants were found to have poor memory for surface properties in
a multiple-object tracking task (Scholl et al., 1999). Indeed, trying to remember object identities
may actively interfere with the ability to track (Fougnie & Marois, 2006). The discrepancy can
be accounted for by an important difference between our study and the previous studies.
Namely, we did not require participants to remember object identities. If we had stopped our
participants occasionally to probe their memory of object identities, we might also have
2We thank Todd Horowitz for this suggestion. Digits, rather than orientations, were used in the main experiment because the 8 digits
were more distinctive than the 8 orientations.
Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 8

observed poor performance. Nonetheless, distinctiveness in features may help segregate targets
from nontargets, a critical component of attentive tracking (Yantis, 1992).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We also found that performance was impaired in the paired-identity conditions compared with
the homogeneous condition, a finding that was observed in one but not another of Horowitz et
al.’s (2007) experiments. The effect was not always statistically reliable (Table 2), but it had
been observed several times (see also Makovski & Jiang, submitted). The impairment was
somewhat surprising because the paired-identity conditions were more distinctive than the
homogeneous condition, as each object was distinctive in feature from all but one other object.
One might expect that distinctiveness would enhance, rather than impair, performance in the
paired-identity condition. In a subsequent study, we found that the impairment for paired
conditions was observed only when the paired condition was randomly intermixed in
presentation with the distinct and homogeneous conditions (Makovski & Jiang, submitted).
Testing these conditions in separate blocks of trials removed impairment in the paired
condition. Our current conclusion is that the use of identity information in multiple-object
tracking is not obligatory, but is under strategic control. A tendency to rely on identity was
also applied to the paired condition when trials were randomly intermixed, because identity
information helped performance on distinct trials,. This strategy sets up a competition between
two types of perceptual grouping: Grouping on the basis of attentional set (tracking targets
versus nontargets), and grouping on the basis of surface features (red objects vs. green objects
and so on). The competition from feature grouping impaired the effectiveness of attentional
grouping. Competition for the two kinds of grouping cannot explain the lack of a benefit in the
conjunction-distinct condition, however, as blocking conditions did not facilitate its
performance compared with the homogeneous condition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The results of the current study clearly demonstrate that feature rather than conjunction
distinctiveness enhances tracking performance. Does this benefit reflect improved tracking
abilities, or that distinctiveness provides additional information for recovering lost targets
(Horowitz et al., 2007)? On the one hand, tracking ability may be directly improved because
observers can tolerate closer distance between a target and a distractor when they have distinct
identities. On the other hand, identity information may be held in a separate system, such as
visual working memory, which allows participants to recover a lost target. To disassociate
these possibilities, in a recent study we asked participants to track distinct objects whose color
changed once every 260msec (Makovski & Jiang, submitted). The objects were always distinct
from one another at any given moment, but the continuity of identity information over time
was destroyed. In this setup, participants could no longer track the distinct condition better
than the homogeneous condition. These data are more consistent with the second hypothesis,
which asserts that identity information is kept in a system (e.g., visual working memory) that
operates in parallel to motion tracking.
Even though features held in visual working memory are typically considered to be bound
together to form coherent objects (Luck & Vogel, 1997), our results suggest that they are not
properly conjoined during attentive tracking. Distinctiveness in feature-conjunction would
have produced as much advantage as distinctiveness in features had they have been properly
conjoined. Apparently, motion made such feature binding more difficult to retain, probably
because the basis for binding - shared location (Treisman, 1988) - is no longer a perceptually
stable property.
In summary, we have shown that multiple-object tracking is sensitive to the distinctness in
object identities, even in a task where identity memory is never probed. The enhancement is
largely feature-based, revealing a limited degree of feature binding in attentive tracking.

Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 9

Acknowledgements
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This research was supported in part by NSF 0733764 and NIH 071788. We thank Leah Watson, Khena Swallow,
Carrick Williams, Todd Horowitz and James Brockmole for comments and suggestions.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Brainard DH. The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial Vision 1997;10(4):433–436. [PubMed: 9176952]
Duncan J. Selective Attention and the Organization of Visual Information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-General 1984;113(4):501–517. [PubMed: 6240521]
Fougnie D, Marois R. Distinct capacity limits for attention and working memory - Evidence from attentive
tracking and visual working memory paradigms. Psychological Science 2006;17(6):526–534.
[PubMed: 16771804]
Horowitz TS, Klieger SB, Fencsik DE, Yang KK, Alvarez GA, Wolfe JM. Tracking unique objects.
Perception & Psychophysics 2007;69(2):172–184. [PubMed: 17557588]
Kahneman D, Treisman A, Gibbs BJ. The Reviewing of Object Files - Object-Specific Integration of
Information. Cognitive Psychology 1992;24(2):175–219. [PubMed: 1582172]
Luck SJ, Vogel EK. The capacity of visual working memory for features and conjunctions. Nature
1997;390(6657):279–281. [PubMed: 9384378]
Makovski T, Jiang YV. The role of visual working memory in attentive tracking of unique objects.
submitted
Mitroff SR, Alvarez GA. Space and time, not surface features, guide object persistence. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review 2007;14(6):1199–1204. [PubMed: 18229497]
Oksama L, Hyönä J. Is multiple object tracking carried out automatically by an early vision mechanism
independent of higher-order cognition? An individual difference approach. Visual Cognition
2004;11:631–671.
Oksama L, Hyönä J. Dynamic binding of identity and location information: A serial model of multipleidentity tracking. Cognitive Psychology. in press
Pelli DG. The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: Transforming numbers into movies.
Spatial Vision 1997;10(4):437–442. [PubMed: 9176953]
Pylyshyn ZW. Some puzzling findings in multiple object tracking: I. Tracking without keeping track of
object identities. Visual Cognition 2004;11(7):801–822.
Pylyshyn ZW, Storm RW. Tracking multiple independent targets: Evidence for a parallel tracking
mechanism. Spatial Vision 1988;3:179–197. [PubMed: 3153671]
Saiki J. Feature binding in object-file representations of multiple moving items. Journal of Vision 2003;3
(1):6–21. [PubMed: 12678621]
Scholl BJ. Objects and attention: the state of the art. Cognition 2001;80(12):1–46. [PubMed: 11245838]
Scholl BJ, Pylyshyn ZW, Franconeri SL. When are featural and spatiotemporal properties encoded as a
result of attentional allocation? Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science 1999;40(4):S797–
S797.
Sinha, P. From fragments to objects: Mechanisms of visual integration; Paper presented at the 2007
Summer Institute on the Visual Perception & Cognition Conference; Minneapolis, MN. 2007;
Spelke, E.; Gutheil, G.; Van de Walle, G. The development of object perception. In: Osherson, D., editor.
Invitation to Cognitive Science, 2nd Ed., Vol 2: Visual Cognition. MIT Press; Cambridge, MA: 1995.
Treisman A. Features and Objects - the 14th Bartlett Memorial Lecture. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology Section a-Human Experimental Psychology 1988;40(2):201–237.
Xu F, Carey S. Infants’ metaphysics: The case of numerical identity. Cognitive Psychology 1996;30(2):
111–153. [PubMed: 8635312]
Yantis S. Multielement visual tracking: Attention and perceptual organization. Cognitive Psychology
1992;24:295–340. [PubMed: 1516359]

Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

Tracking accuracy as a function of stimulus conditions (Error bars show ±1 standard error of
the mean). The dashed line represents performance in the homogenous condition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 11

Table 1

A schematic illustration of tracking objects used in Experiment 1
Targets

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

Makovski and Jiang

Page 12
Targets

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

73 (4)

70 (4)

80 (3)

70(5)

2: Blocked design

3: Novel shapes

4: Line orientations

Homogeneous

1: Variable trial
duration

Control Experiment

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Table 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

77(4)
p<0.01

86 (3)
p<0.01

78 (4)
p=0.02

83 (4)
p=0.03

Color-distinct

69(5)
p=0.62

82 (3)
p=0.22

79 (4)
p<0.01

78 (5)
p=0.02

Shape-distinct

77(5)
p<0.01

87(3)
p<0.01

77 (4)
p=0.04

79 (5)
p=0.09

Both-distinct

71(5)
p=0.43

80 (3)
p=0.57

68 (4)
p=0.42

65 (5)
p=0.02

Conjunction-distinct

71(6)
p=0.41

76 (3)
p=0.03

73 (4)
p=0.93

Color-paired

73(5)
p<0.01

79 (3)
p=0.50

N/A

68 (5)
p=0.17

Shape-paired

69(6)
p=0.57

78 (3)
p=0.21

70 (5)
p=0.40

Conjunction-paired

Mean percent correct in the four control experiments (Standard Error in parenthesis). The p-values correspond to the t-tests
comparing each condition with the homogenous condition
Makovski and Jiang
Page 13

Vis cogn. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 June 1.

