Psychological Science
http://pss.sagepub.com/

Show Your Pride : Evidence for a Discrete Emotion Expression
Jessica L. Tracy and Richard W. Robins
Psychological Science 2004 15: 194
DOI: 10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.01503008.x
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://pss.sagepub.com/content/15/3/194

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

Association for Psychological Science

Additional services and information for Psychological Science can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://pss.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://pss.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

>> Version of Record - Mar 1, 2004
What is This?

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at UNIV CALIFORNIA BERKELEY LIB on August 25, 2012

PS YC HOLOGIC AL S CIE NCE

Research Report

Show Your Pride
Evidence for a Discrete Emotion Expression
Jessica L. Tracy and Richard W. Robins
University of California, Davis

ABSTRACT—Three

experiments provide converging evidence that
pride has a distinct, recognizable expression. Experiment 1 showed
that judges can agree in identifying a posed expression as showing pride and can reliably distinguish pride expressions from
expressions of related emotions such as happiness. Experiment 2
showed that judges can identify the pride expression when the
task uses an open-ended response format that does not cue them
with the label ‘‘pride.’’ Experiment 3 showed that the pride
expression includes a small smile, with head tilted slightly back,
visibly expanded posture, and arms raised above the head or
hands on hips. Overall, these ﬁndings challenge the assumption
that all positive emotions share the same expression, and suggest
that pride may be added to the pantheon of basic emotions
generally viewed as evolved responses.

Building on Darwin’s (1872) seminal work on the expression of
emotions, contemporary researchers have argued that emotions
evolved, in part, to communicate needs that facilitate survival and
reproduction, and that, consequently, each emotion should have a
unique signal reﬂecting its evolutionary origins. Supporting this perspective, research has demonstrated that there is a universally recognized nonverbal expression for each of the so-called basic emotions:
anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, surprise, and possibly contempt and embarrassment (Ekman, 1992). Happiness is the only positively valenced emotion on this list, leading researchers to conclude
that all positive emotions share the same expression (Ekman, 1992;
Fredrickson & Branigan, 2001). Thus, evidence that pride has its own
distinct expression would overturn this assumption and imply that
pride may have evolved to serve a particular communicative function.
Pride is an important emotion that plays a critical role in many
domains of psychological functioning (Tracy & Robins, in press).
Feelings of pride reinforce prosocial behaviors such as achievement
and caregiving. The loss of pride, in the form of humiliation or ego
threats, can provoke aggression. The regulation of pride is intrinsically linked to the regulation and maintenance of self-esteem. In
fact, pride is the emotion (along with shame) that gives self-esteem its
affective kick (Brown & Marshall, 2001), and self-esteem in turn
inﬂuences a wide range of intrapsychic and interpersonal processes.
Address correspondence to Jessica L. Tracy, University of California, Department of Psychology, Davis, CA 95616-8686; e-mail:
jltracy@ucdavis.edu.

194

Speciﬁcally, feelings of pride may boost self-esteem and thereby alert
an individual that his or her behavior (or self) is valued by others. The
expression of pride may serve a complementary adaptive function,
drawing attention to the individual and alerting the social group that
he or she merits increased acceptance and status.
Despite its theoretical importance, pride has received relatively
little empirical attention. Yet, in 1872, Darwin wrote, ‘‘Of all the
complex emotions, pride, perhaps, is the most plainly expressed . . .
a proud man exhibits his sense of superiority over others by holding
his head and body erect’’ (p. 263). A handful of studies have indirectly
addressed this possibility by examining the nonverbal behaviors
shown after success experiences (Belsky & Domitrovich, 1997;
Kasari, Sigman, Baumgartner, & Stipek, 1993; Lewis, Alessandri, &
Sullivan, 1992; Stepper & Strack, 1993; Weisfeld & Beresford, 1982).
The ﬁndings from these studies point to some possible components of
a pride expression, including an expanded posture, upward or spreadout positioning of the arms, positioning of the head up and tilted back,
and a smile. However, none of these studies tested whether pride has a
recognizable nonverbal expression. This was the goal of the present
research.

EXPERIMENT 1

Method
Judges
Fifty-six undergraduate students (87% women) participated for course
credit.

Stimuli
Male and female targets posing expressions of pride, happiness, and
surprise were photographed from the waist or shoulders up. Happiness
and surprise were included because they are theoretically similar to
pride and typically elicit the highest recognition rates of any basic
emotions. The instructions for posing pride were based on previous
research (Belsky & Domitrovich, 1997; Kasari et al., 1993; Lewis
et al., 1992; Stepper & Strack, 1993; Weisfeld & Beresford, 1982); the
instructions for posing happiness and surprise were based on the directed facial action task (DFA; Levenson, Carstensen, Friesen, &
Ekman, 1991). We selected 10 photos that represented a variety of
possible pride expressions and 19 photos that were good representations of happiness and surprise.

Copyright r at
2004
Psychological
Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com
UNIVAmerican
CALIFORNIA
BERKELEY LIBSociety
on August 25, 2012

Volume 15—Number 3

Jessica L. Tracy and Richard W. Robins

Procedure
Each photo was projected onto a large (4  6 ft.) screen for 30 s.
Judges were told to choose from a list of options the emotion that ‘‘best
matches the emotion expressed by the person in the photo.’’ The options were ‘‘happiness,’’ ‘‘pride,’’ ‘‘surprise,’’ and ‘‘no emotion.’’

Results and Discussion
All 10 potential pride expressions were identiﬁed as pride at greaterthan-chance frequencies (M 5 83%, range 5 73–95%, all ps < .01).1
These frequencies were comparable to those for happiness (M5 79%,
range 5 63–98%) and surprise (M 5 96%, range 5 95–98%). Happiness and surprise photos were almost never identiﬁed as pride (Ms 5
5% and 0%, respectively).
These ﬁndings suggest that individuals can agree on a pride expression and can distinguish it from happiness and surprise expressions.2 However, Experiment 1 used a forced-choice response format,
which may have inﬂated agreement by constraining responses (Russell, 1994). In Experiment 2, we examined whether judges can
identify a pride expression when the task uses an open-ended response format that does not cue them with the label ‘‘pride.’’

EXPERIMENT 2

Method
Judges
Ninety-six undergraduate students (69% women) participated for
course credit.
Stimuli
The six photos that were identiﬁed as pride with the highest frequencies in Experiment 1, as well as the six best happiness and three
best surprise photos, were included as stimuli.
Procedure
Experiment 2 used the same procedure as Experiment 1, except that
judges were asked an open-ended question, ‘‘Which emotion is being
expressed in this photo?’’

Results and Discussion
The open-ended format generated a range of responses. Eight undergraduate students (blind to the photos and the goals of the experiment)
rated the extent to which each response was prototypical of pride using
a 5-point Likert scale (a reliability5.92). Responses were classiﬁed as
‘‘pride related’’ if the mean prototypicality rating was greater than or
equal to the midpoint of the scale (3.0), and as ‘‘not pride related’’ if
the mean was less than the midpoint of the scale. For example,
‘‘proud,’’ ‘‘triumphant,’’ and ‘‘self-conﬁdent’’ were classiﬁed as pride
related, whereas ‘‘happy’’ and ‘‘angry’’ were not. All six pride photos
were identiﬁed as pride related at greater-than-chance frequencies

(M564%, range557–82%, p < .01).3 These frequencies are similar to
those found in previous studies of basic emotions that used an openended response format (range 5 50–97%; Boucher & Carlson, 1980).
Only 3% of responses to happiness photos and 1% of responses to
surprise photos were classiﬁed as pride related.
EXPERIMENT 3

Together, Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrated that expressions identiﬁed as pride generally include some degree of smile, head tilt, and
expanded posture, with the hands on the hips or the arms raised above
the head. To better understand the precise features of the pride expression, in Experiment 3 we manipulated these potentially relevant
components and examined the effects on pride recognition.

Method
Judges
One hundred seventy-eight undergraduate students (70% women)
participated for course credit.
Stimuli
Male and female targets posed expressions of pride, happiness, surprise, and contempt. Each target posed eight pride expressions,
crossing small versus large smile, head tilted slightly (151) versus
farther back (301), and arms raised above the head versus hands on
hips. Happiness, surprise, and contempt were posed using DFA instructions; however, bodily components were added for a second
surprise expression and a second contempt expression. Speciﬁcally, in
one version of the surprise expression, targets posed the facial muscle
movements as speciﬁed by the DFA, and in the second version, they
posed these same muscle movements but also raised their arms in
front of them, with a slight bend at the elbows. Similarly, in one
version of the contempt expression, targets posed the facial muscle
movements as speciﬁed by the DFA, and in the second version, they
posed the same muscle movements but also tilted their head slightly
(about 151) back. Two photographs were taken of each pose—one from
the waist up (upper body) and one from the shoulders up (head and
shoulders)—so that we could test whether pride recognition requires a
visibly expanded posture. Thus, 16 potential pride expressions were
available from each target. Each judge viewed 2 of these expressions
as posed by all targets, so that smile intensity and head tilt were
manipulated between subjects, and arm position and visible posture
were manipulated within subjects.
Procedure
Each photo was projected onto a large screen for 30 s. For each
photo, judges chose one of the following response options: ‘‘boredom,’’
‘‘contempt,’’ ‘‘excitement,’’ ‘‘happiness,’’ ‘‘pride,’’ ‘‘surprise,’’ ‘‘none of
these are correct,’’ and ‘‘other: ___.’’ Boredom, excitement, and contempt were added as options because these words were occasionally
3

1

Chance was conservatively set at 33% in all experiments.
2
Judges’ gender and ethnicity did not moderate the rate at which pride expressions were identiﬁed in this experiment or in Experiments 2 and 3, with the
exception of a single photo in Experiment 2 that was recognized less well by
men than by women.

Volume 15—Number 3

We also analyzed whether the continuous prototypicality ratings differed for
the three categories of photos. The results were consistent with the results of
the analysis using the dichotomous classiﬁcation: Responses to pride photos
were signiﬁcantly more prototypical of pride than responses to happiness or
surprise photos (standardized mean difference 5 1.75 and 3.29, respectively,
ps < .01).

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at UNIV CALIFORNIA BERKELEY LIB on August 25, 2012

195

Show Your Pride

applied to pride photos in Experiment 2. The ‘‘none of these are
correct’’ option was added to improve upon the forced-choice format
(Frank & Stennett, 2001).

Results
Two expressions received the highest frequencies of pride identiﬁcation (Ms 5 74% and 77%, averaged across targets, both ps < .01),
and thus represent the most prototypical expressions of pride. These
expressions included a small smile, with the head tilted slightly back,
fully visible expanded posture (i.e., upper body), and either arms
raised or hands on hips. The two best exemplars of these expressions,
shown in Figure 1, were identiﬁed as pride by 87% and 89% of
judges. Comparable frequencies were found for happiness (M 5 78%)
and surprise (M 5 86%) expressions, and lower frequencies were
found for contempt (M 5 35%) expressions.
However, identiﬁcation rates (averaged across the targets) varied
considerably across the 16 potential pride expressions (range 5 23–
77%), indicating that certain components are necessary for recognition of a pride expression. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed
that pride identiﬁcation was higher for expressions with (a) a small
rather than a large smile, F(1, 151) 5 15.51, p < .01; (b) head tilted
slightly rather than far back, F(1, 151)56.24, p < .05; (c) arms raised
rather than hands on the hips, F(1, 151) 5 29.98, p < .01; and (d) a
visibly expanded posture rather than only head and shoulders visible,
F(1, 151) 5 192.29, p < .01.4 These main effects, except for the main
effect of arm position, are consistent with the two most prototypical
expressions shown in Figure 1.5
GENERAL DISCUSSION

These three experiments demonstrate that pride has a distinct, recognizable nonverbal expression. This expression can be distinguished
from expressions of other positive emotions and states (e.g., happiness,
excitement), as well as from expressions of negative emotions and
states (e.g., contempt, boredom). The pride expression can be identiﬁed when judges use either a forced-choice or an open-ended (i.e.,
4
We collected additional data to test whether pride can be recognized when
targets show the bodily component of the pride expression with none or part of
the facial components (e.g., a neutral expression). Forty-one undergraduate
students viewed photos of targets posing eight pride expressions, crossing smile
(none, small), head tilt (none, slight), and arm position (raised, hands on hips).
Judges also viewed photos of targets posing anger, fear, happiness, sadness, and
surprise. Consistent with our expectations, an ANOVA showed that pride
identiﬁcation was higher for expressions with (a) a small smile rather than no
smile, F(1, 38)535.30, p < .01; (b) slight rather than no head tilt, F(1, 38)5
68.00, p < .01; and (c) arms raised rather than hands on hips, F(1, 38)522.42,
p < .01. The only expressions recognized as pride at greater-than-chance
frequencies (with chance set at 33%) were the two prototypical expressions
identiﬁed in Experiment 3 (small smile, slight head tilt, arms raised or hands
on hips); this pattern was reﬂected in a three-way interaction of smile, head tilt,
and arm position, F(1, 38) 5 16.07, p < .01.
5
To test whether pride can be recognized from the face alone, we asked 85
undergraduate students to view cropped photos (showing only the face) of the
two best pride expressions and all happiness, surprise, and contempt expressions from Experiment 3. Pride recognition was not greater than chance for any
of the pride photos (M 5 24%; range 5 11–38%). In all cases, identiﬁcation
rates were signiﬁcantly lower for the face-only pride photos than for the uncropped upper-body photos, ps < .01. This ﬁnding, combined with the null
ﬁnding for neutral facial expressions (i.e., no smile, no head tilt) described in
footnote 4, suggests that both the face and the body are necessary for recognition of a pride expression.

196

Fig. 1. Prototypical pride expressions. The expression in the upper
panel was identiﬁed as pride by 89% of judges; the expression in the
lower panel was identiﬁed as pride by 87% of judges (see Experiment 3).

participants are not cued by the label ‘‘pride’’) response format, and
when they are free to choose ‘‘no emotion,’’ ‘‘none of these,’’ and
‘‘other’’ as a response. Finally, the pride expression is as recognizable
as expressions of basic emotions; across the three experiments, the
pride-recognition rate was comparable to rates found previously for
basic emotions (range569–97%; Ekman, Sorenson, & Friesen, 1969).
These ﬁndings have several broad implications. First, pride can
be added to the pantheon of emotions that have distinct, recognizable
expressions. This ﬁnding challenges the assumption that all positive
emotions share the same nonverbal expression. More generally,
the identiﬁcation of a distinct signal raises the possibility that pride is
an evolved response. If the pride expression is a product of natural

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at UNIV CALIFORNIA BERKELEY LIB on August 25, 2012

Volume 15—Number 3

Jessica L. Tracy and Richard W. Robins

selection, then it may have evolved to serve a particular communicative function, perhaps to convey an individual’s success to others
and thereby promote social status. For example, the expanded posture
associated with the expression may attract attention to the individual
and create the impression of largeness (which conveys dominance),
and the slight head tilt may allow the individual to gaze above the
masses, conveying superiority.
A second broad implication of the present research is that nonverbal expressions of emotion are not restricted to the face. The
prototypical pride expression involves nonfacial components: Pride
recognition was signiﬁcantly reduced when the expression was restricted to the head and shoulders, and was not greater than chance
when the expression was restricted to the face (see footnote 5).
However, body posture alone cannot signal pride, as the expression
could not be recognized without the presence of the associated facial
components (see footnote 4).
A third implication of the present ﬁndings is that they provide the
basis for coding participants’ feelings of pride from their observed
nonverbal behavior. In other words, researchers who expect pride
emotional responses in their experiments can assess the occurrence of
such responses by coding for the presence or absence of the components of the pride expression. A nonverbal coding scheme will facilitate research on the antecedents, outcomes, and functions of pride in
a wide range of contexts.
The present ﬁndings suggest several other directions for future
research. First, studies are needed to better delineate the components
of the expression, specifying the exact musculature and body movements involved.
Second, studies are needed to determine whether individuals experiencing pride in naturalistic settings display nonverbal behaviors
consistent with the posed expression documented in the present research. It seems likely that this will be the case, because, as Ekman
(1973) noted, it is unclear how judges could reach agreement on posed
expressions if the poses do not represent expressions that occur
spontaneously.
Third, studies are needed to explore the universality of the pride
expression.6 For example, can judges from a culture with minimal
access to Western visual media recognize the expression? If so, this
would provide further support for the hypothesis that pride is a product of natural selection.
Fourth, studies should examine the social outcomes of the pride
expression (e.g., does the expression convey leadership abilities?).
Such studies will shed light on the proximal functions of pride, which
likely involve motivating prosocial behaviors, and on the more distal
functions, which may involve communicating dominance and status.
In general, we hope that by demonstrating that pride has a unique
nonverbal expression, the present research will provide a foundation
for future studies on this important emotion.

Acknowledgments—The ﬁrst author was supported by a predoctoral
fellowship from National Institute of Mental Health Grant T32 MH
2006. We thank Jennifer Beer, Robin Edelstein, Paul Ekman, Simona
Ghetti, Josh Hart, Kristen Lagattuta, Erik Noftle, Phil Shaver, Gina
Sutin, and Kali Trzesniewski for their helpful comments on this
manuscript.
REFERENCES
Belsky, J., & Domitrovich, C. (1997). Temperament and parenting antecedents
of individual difference in three-year-old boys’ pride and shame reactions. Child Development, 68, 456–466.
Boucher, J.D., & Carlson, G.E. (1980). Recognition of facial expression in three
cultures. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 11, 263–280.
Brown, J.D., & Marshall, M.A. (2001). Self-esteem and emotion: Some thoughts
about feelings. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 575–584.
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Ekman, P. (1973). Cross-cultural studies of facial expression. In P. Ekman
(Ed.), Darwin and facial expression: A century of research in review
(pp. 169–222). New York: Academic Press.
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 6,
169–200.
Ekman, P., Sorenson, E.R., & Friesen, W.V. (1969). Pan-cultural elements in
facial displays of emotion. Science, 164, 86–88.
Frank, M.G., & Stennett, J. (2001). The forced-choice paradigm and the perception of facial expressions of emotion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 75–85.
Fredrickson, B.L., & Branigan, C. (2001). Positive emotions. In T.J. Mayne &
G.A. Bonanno (Eds.), Emotions: Current issues and future directions (pp.
123–151). New York: Guilford.
Kasari, C., Sigman, M.D., Baumgartner, P., & Stipek, D.J. (1993). Pride and
mastery in children with autism. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 34, 353–362.
Levenson, R.W., Carstensen, L.L., Friesen, W.V., & Ekman, P. (1991). Emotion,
physiology, and expression in old age. Psychology and Aging, 6, 28–35.
Lewis, M., Alessandri, S.M., & Sullivan, M.W. (1992). Differences in shame
and pride as a function of children’s gender and task difﬁculty. Child
Development, 63, 630–638.
Russell, J.A. (1994). Is there universal recognition of emotion from facial expressions? A review of the cross-cultural studies. Psychological Bulletin,
115, 102–141.
Stepper, S., & Strack, F. (1993). Proprioceptive determinants of emotional and
nonemotional feelings. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6,
211–220.
Tracy, J.L., & Robins, R.W. (in press). Putting the self into self-conscious
emotions: A theoretical model. Psychological Inquiry.
Weisfeld, G.E., & Beresford, J.M. (1982). Erectness of posture as an indicator
of dominance or success in humans. Motivation and Emotion, 6, 113–
131.

(RECEIVED 11/4/02; REVISION ACCEPTED 2/6/03)

6
In another study, we found that 28 judges who were born, raised, and living
in Italy showed high recognition for the pride expression (M578%), suggesting
that the expression generalizes at least across Western cultures.

Volume 15—Number 3

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at UNIV CALIFORNIA BERKELEY LIB on August 25, 2012

197

