 Stanford University University of California, Santa Barbara Rebels have a special place in social psychology. In a field that often violence of this backlash against whistle-blowers and rebels is underscores the evils (and the power) of conformity and obedience, people surprising precisely because the exact same behavior draws willing to go against the grain in the name of their principles are presented as admiration and respect from observers not directly involved in the the lone exceptions that restore our faith in human nature. When we report situation – and also because this rejection does not just come from classic findings showing that a majority of people agree to hurt an innocent peers who stand to suffer from the rebellion, but also from peers who victim (Milgram, 1974), fail to help a person in need (Latané & Darley, merely failed to report or oppose the abuse. 1970), or simply conform to an erroneous pronouncement (Asch, 1956), we A similarly puzzling reversal is captured in a variation of find solace in the fact that a minority of respondents hold their own, and do Milgram’s obedience paradigm (1965). Whereas readers of the the honorable thing. Accounts of the notorious 1968 My Lai massacre original studies typically applaud the third of participants who contrast the destructive obedience of William Calley and his men with the refused to shock the victim all the way as strong, reliable, and decency of Hugh Thompson Jr., the helicopter pilot who stopped the altruistic moral exemplars, obedient participants had a very different massacre by standing up against Calley. We celebrate men like Frank opinion. When naïve participants were paired with confederates Serpico, the NYPD police officer who took a stand against corruption at a instructed to stand up against the experimenter (Milgram, 1965, time when it was rampant in the force (Maas, 1973). And one would hope Study 2), those participants who kept shocking the victim throughout that Joseph Darby, the military policeman who turned in the Abu Ghraib the procedure were quick to put down rebels at debriefing. Instead of picture CD to authorities, will similarly go down in history as a hero who seeing rebels as strong, they thought for example that rebels were prevented further abuse. “just being ridiculous” and that they “lost all control of themselves” (p.132). Instead of seeing rebels as reliable, they thought that they should not have quit (“They came here for an experiment, and I think they should have stuck with it,” p.132). Instead of seeing rebels as It may therefore come as a surprise that these inspiring rebels all altruistic, they saw them as ignoring the needs of the experimenter suffered intense backlash from their peers. Hugh Thomson was (“If [...] I did the same, I don’t know how many months and days shunned for years by fellow soldiers and received numerous death you’d have to continue before you got done,” p.132). Just as in the threats (BBC News, 2006); Frank Serpico was shot in the face in a case of the moral rebels depicted in news reports, the exact same suspected setup by fellow NYPD officers, prompting him to leave the behavior seems to be sanctified by some, and despised by others, country for a decade (Maas, 1973); and Joseph Darby had to be taken depending on their involvement in the situation. into protective military custody at an undisclosed location after The goal of this paper is to document and understand this receiving various threats from former colleagues (Rosin, 2004). The backlash against moral rebels. We define moral rebels as individuals who take a principled stand against the status quo, who refuse to comply, stay silent, or simply go along when this would require that they compromise their values. We predict that their rebellion will be inspiring to uninvolved observers (e.g., civilians hearing of Joseph Benoît Monin, Department of Psychology, Stanford University; Pamela J. Darby, or readers of Milgram’s obedience studies), but threatening to Sawyer, Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara; people in the situation (e.g., co-workers of Joseph Darby who did not Matthew Marquez, New York City, New York. report similar abuses, obedient participants in Milgram’s studies), The authors wish to thank Adam D. Galinsky, Jennifer Whitson, Katie Liljenquist, and Brian C. Cadena for their assistance with Study 1, Kieran S. whose own behavior is implicitly called into question, and who will O’Connor for data collection in Study 4, and Lauren A. Calderon, Adam D. dislike rebels as a result. Although we started with dramatic Galinsky, Dale T. Miller, and Leaf Van Boven for extremely helpful feedback on examples, this threat can be observed in everyday settings. When a previous versions of this manuscript. doctor decides she will not accept lavish gifts from drug companies, Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Benoît Monin, we would predict that she would inspire more respect from residents Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Stanford University, Stanford, California on her staff than from fellow doctors who have accepted such perks 94305, or via electronic mail to monin@stanford.edu. in the past and may perceive this refusal as an implicit indictment. irritating even if the authors never met us. And by extension, a moral When a student refuses, on principle, to download pirated music from rebel seen on television may irk a viewer whose behavior is the internet, we would predict that her choice makes her more likable implicitly called in question, even if there is no chance that the rebel to peers who do not own computers and have never had the will ever meet the viewer and actually form any judgment about her. opportunity to download a song than to peers who routinely download It is the fact that the rebel would most likely reproach the viewer (and pirated music without (until now) a second thought. the ensuing self-threat) that makes the rebel less appealing, whereas an unvested bystander might embrace him or her. Where does this backlash come from? In the examples above, Now that we have articulated what we believe to be the personal involvement seems to be an important moderator of the underlying causes of the rejection, let us elaborate on it content: reaction to moral rebels. Rebels may think that they are only taking a What personality dimensions are rebels put down on? A striking stand against the status quo, but bystanders who did not take that stand feature of our opening examples is that the exact same behavior can can take this rebellion as a personal threat. This suggests that the root be constructed in such different ways depending on the perceiver’s of resentment may be that the rebel’s choice implicitly condemns the involvement. One reason why it is easy to demote moral behavior perceiver’s own behavior, and that this potential reproach shakes the might precisely be because individuals hold multiple moral perceiver’s confidence in being a good, moral person (their sense of prototypes, so they can opportunistically emphasize the aspect of “moral and adaptive adequacy,” Steele, 1988, p.262; see also Sherman morality that best preserves their self-image. Walker and Hennig & Cohen, 2006). Milgram describes how “the reaction of the defiant (2004) identified just, brave, and caring as three distinct moral confederate defines the act of shocking the victim as improper” and prototypes, corresponding to different spaces in the two-dimensional how “each additional shock administered by the naïve subject now space defined by agency/dominance and communion/nurturance. As carries with it a measure of social disapproval from the two [defiant] in the Milgram example above, observers may see rebels as the confederates” (1965, p.133). We propose that the rebel does not even embodiment of righteous agency (closer to Walker and Hennig’s need to be in the room, nor does he need to know of the actor’s “brave” prototype) for standing up against an unjust situation, behavior, for his stance to be threatening; his gesture alone stands as a whereas threatened actors may deny that it took any strength of claim “defining the act as improper”. Non-rebels basically assume that character to rebel, and instead define the rebel’s stance in terms of rebels espouse the indictment of passivity attributed to Black Panther lack of communion (further from the “caring” prototype). Besides activist Eldridge Cleaver that “you're either part of the solution or part overall social attraction, the studies presented here will therefore of the problem” – and no one likes to be called part of the problem. By strive to identify the dimensions of interpersonal judgment used by taking a moral stand, rebels imply that it is wrong for anyone else not individuals when encountering moral rebels, paying particular to do the same, because moral dictates are by definition universal attention to the dimensions of communion and agency. (Frankena, 1973; Turiel, 1983). By claiming the moral high ground, rebels are effectively calling everything else the low road. Moral reproach, even imagined, can be extremely threatening to individuals’ sense of adequacy. Sabini and Silver (1982) noted how To facilitate the evaluation of the claims presented here, three sensitive individuals are to moral reproach, because of the centrality of hypothesis (and six related predictions) can be formulated: morality in most people’s self-concept (Allison, Goethals & Messick, 1989), and because they are aware of the social stigma that accompanies having one’s morality questioned (Park, Ybarra & Stanik, 2006). It may therefore not be surprising that actors have little The simple fact of obeying in a problematic situation should make fondness for someone whose behavior amounts to a wag of the finger individuals like a rebel less (relative to an obedient other). Thus at their own. Other people’s moral claims, and the perception that they obedient actors not only go along with a problematic situation, but could look down on us for our choices, might shake our confidence in perversely become its guardian by putting down those who resist it. our own adequacy. Only the most self-confident of individuals would This predicted interaction could be broken down into two simple welcome such an implicit challenge with equanimity. If that is the effects: case, manipulations that comfort individuals that they are good, able Prediction 1a: Rejection by actors. Actors should like rebels less people (self-affirmation; Steele, 1988) and that have been shown to than they like obedient others. They should not give rebels any credit reduce the threat of superior others (Spencer, Fein, & Lomore, 2001) for their rebellious behavior (no agency or morality effect), and might reduce the need to put down moral rebels to protect the self. justify rejecting rebels by casting them as not very nice people (low Two things need to be stressed about this imagined reproach: First, communion) [Studies 1, 2, 3, and 4]. we propose that it is not necessary for moral rebels to condemn Prediction 1b: Attraction by observers. Observers on the other explicitly those who did not rebel. The very fact of taking a moral hand should like rebels more than they like obedient others. They stance should be perceived as an implied reproach against (and should appreciate the rebels’ strength of character (higher agency) implicit rejection of) those not making the same choice. Second, and moral righteousness (higher ratings of morality), regardless of virtual reproach may be enough to trigger resentment, with no need for how nice rebels are seen to be (no communion effect) [Studies 1, 2, the rebel to ever actually know of the conformist’s behavior. A and 3]. newspaper article or website castigating our way of life can be the dissonance created by writing it (Festinger, 1957). Participants who are simply told to write the speech with no room for refusal The first step in triggering resentment is the perception that rebels (low-choice condition) do not typically change their attitude as look down on those who did not rebel, and would reject them if they much. met them. Rejection would therefore be a preemptive strike, to put We focused on the latter condition, reasoning that low-choice down someone who is in a position to put down the actor. From this participants were similar to obedient observers of moral rebels: They hypothesis we can make two concrete predictions: are unquestionably going along with a behavior that goes against Prediction 2a: Imagined rejection. Actors should expect to be liked their own attitude and that, they believe, will have concrete negative and respected less by rebels than by obedient others [Studies 3 and 4]. consequences (Cooper & Fazio, 1984; Scher & Cooper, 1989). They Prediction 2b: Mediation. Rejection of rebels should be a function have ample motive to stand up for their own attitude, and yet they do of how much actors imagine that they would be rejected by rebels not. And we know from the results of high-choice conditions that [Studies 3 and 4]. without the safety blanket of the low-choice manipulation, they would feel a measure of discomfort associated with misrepresenting their true self. So how would they react to the news that another participant in the same condition refused to go along? As in the real- The second step in explaining resentment is that reproach, even world examples presented above, we predicted that disinterested imagined, shakes actors’ overall sense of self-worth. The rejection of raters (observers) would like and admire a rebel standing up for his rebels would be an attempt to deny this vulnerability and to preserve opinion more than an obedient other (Prediction 1b), but that one’s sense of being a good person. If this is true, individuals who are participants who have themselves gone along with the problematic have been secured in their moral and adaptive adequacy, i.e., self- behavior (actors) by agreeing to write a counter-attitudinal speech in affirmed (Steele, 1988), should show less need to reject rebels or deny a low-choice condition would instead reject the rebel (Prediction 1a). the implications of their stance: Beyond this global rejection (which we measured with liking and Prediction 3a: Self-affirmation opens the heart. Self-affirmed respect items), we wanted to document the nature of the impressions actors should not feel a need to reject rebels as much as individuals formed about the rebels by actors and observers, and in particular to less secure in their sense of self-worth, even if they still believe that document the role of agency and communion in the perception of rebels would dislike them [Study 4]. rebels. In the introduction we posited that observers would see rebels Prediction 3b: Self-affirmation opens the eyes. Not needing to deny are strong individuals (higher agency), but not necessarily nicer than the rebels’ gesture to protect a fragile sense of worth, self-affirmed obedient others (no effect on communion) (Prediction 1b), whereas actors should be able to recognize its value and draw appropriate actors would definitely see rebels as not very nice (to justify rejecting conclusions about their own behavior [Study 4]. them – lower communion), and not give them credit for being strong either (no effect on agency) (Prediction 1a). Compared to obedient others, rebels should be rated higher on agency by observers (1b), and lower on communion by actors (1a). We present four studies testing the hypothesis that a moral rebel is rejected when others are personally threatened by the rebellion as an implied condemnation of their own conformity. In all four studies, participants in the focal experimental condition agree to go along with a problematic request from the experimenter (speaking against their beliefs in Study 1, playing a racist game in Studies 2 to 4), only to discover after the fact that another participant (actually a confederate) refused, on principled grounds, to comply with the experimenter. Control participants rate an obedient confederate, or are not asked to perform the problematic task beforehand, or both. Furthermore, Study 3 assesses the role of imagined rejection as a factor in resentment by testing whether rejection of the rebel is mediated by the fear of being rejected by him or her, and Study 4 tests the involvement of self-threat by testing whether buttressing one’s sense of self-worth and integrity through self-affirmation (Steele, 1988; Sherman & Cohen, 2006) eliminates the rejection of moral rebels. Participants and design. Seventy undergraduates at a large U.S. private university (24 men, 35 women, 11 unreported) took part in this experiment in a laboratory setting in exchange for $10. Thirty-five first completed the actor version of the experiment, while 35 others were recruited a month later from the same population to complete the observer version 1 . In both versions of the study, participants were randomly assigned to hearing a rebel or an obedient other, resulting in a 2 (Actor vs. Observer) by 2 (Rebel vs. Obedient) between-subject design. The experimenter was either a White man or a White woman. Procedure. Participants in the actor version took part in the low-choice version of an induced compliance paradigm (Zanna & Cooper, 1974). Under the guise of studying the relationship between perception of personality and cogency of arguments, the experimenter told participants to make a speech in favor of eliminating the reading week (a class-free period preceding final examinations), a proposal that we knew was very unpopular in our subject population. To instantiate foreseeable aversive consequences (Cooper & Fazio, 1984), we told participants that the tapes would go to the “Undergraduate Committee on Curriculum,” which allegedly funded the project and would probably use the arguments when deciding on the reading week. Participants were given a few minutes to prepare their speech, recorded it on their own, completed some questionnaires, and were then introduced to the “personality perception” part of the experiment. In this section they listened to a tape allegedly recorded by a previous participant in the same setting, and used the scales provided (see “measures” below) to indicate what they thought of the Study 1 uses a variation of the induced compliance paradigm (Zanna & Cooper, 1974; Galinsky, Stone & Cooper, 2000) to first investigate the rejection of moral rebels. In this classic procedure of the cognitive dissonance literature, participants write a speech that goes against their own attitude, and when they perceive that they could have easily refused to write (high-choice condition), they tend to change their attitude in line with their speech, presumably to reduce 1 Participants were not randomly assigned to the actor or observer group, but all were drawn from the same population and we had no reason to suspect any systematic pre-existing differences between the two groups. Studies 2 to 4 remedy this issue by randomly assigning participants to all conditions. Suspicion. Ten participants (out of 70) expressed suspicion at effect for Rebellion, F(1,56) = 3.80, p < .06, MSE = .71, partial η = debriefing – not uncommon with this type of procedure (see Galinsky .06, but no significant interaction, F(1,56) = 1.9, p = .18, partial η 2 = et al., 2000). We conducted the analyses below with the 60 non- .03, despite the fact that actors rated rebels lower on communion than suspicious participants first, but results and significance levels for the obedient others, t(56) = 2.17, p = .03, whereas observers showed no main analyses were the same with all 70 participants. such difference, t(56) = .45, ns. Attraction. We created an index of attraction by averaging scores Other variables. We had asked actors to rate how much choice on liking as a friend, as a roommate, on a project, and respect they thought they had in making the speech on a 9-point scale (Cronbach’s α = .80), and conducted a Rebellion (rebel, obedient) by ranging from not at all to a lot. Actors who saw a rebel reported Role (actor, observer) analysis of variance (ANOVA) on this index. feeling more freedom, M = 3.91, SD = 2.70, than actors who saw an As predicted, we found a significant interaction between role and obedient other, M = 1.85, SD = 1.34, t (22) = -2.43, p = .02, but this rebellion, F(1,56) = 11.00, p = .002, MSE = 1.20, partial η 2 = .16, due score was not correlated with the attraction composite, r(22) = .12, to the fact that observers preferred the rebel (M = .90, SD = .87) to the ns. We also asked participants how the other participant felt about obedient target (M = .07, SD = 1.51), t (56) = 2.22, p = .03, d = -.72, eliminating reading week, and submitted this variable to a Role by whereas actors preferred the obedient other (M = .59, SD = .70) to the Rebellion ANOVA. Not surprisingly, participants believed that the rebel (M = -.50, SD = 1.21), t (56) = 2.46, p = .02, d = 1.19 (see Figure 1). rebel was more against it than the obedient other, F(1,54) = 80.50, p Neither of the main effects was significant, both ps > .13, partial η 2 < .001, MSE = 2.97, but neither the main effect of role (p > .11) nor < .05. the interaction (p > . 38) were significant. Agency and communion. We first conducted a principal axes factor analysis with a Promax rotation (as recommended by Russell, 2002) on the trait ratings, which suggested a two-factor solution (using the scree plot method) capturing over 62% of the variance. We created 2 Study 1 provides initial support for our perversity of obedience factors by averaging traits with loadings higher than .5 on one and hypothesis (H1), that the same act of rebellion can be liked by some only one factor, yielding a non-overlapping solution that included and rejected by others, depending on whether the rebel’s behavior most traits (but excluded fair, which loaded less than .5 on both can be seen as an implicit indictment of the judges’ own actions. factors). The first factor (agency) averaged independent, strong, Considered in the abstract and from a disinterested standpoint, rebels confident, active, high self-esteem, honest, intelligent, and mature, were liked better and even seen as more agentic than obedient others Cronbach’s α = .93, whereas the second one (communion) averaged (supporting Prediction 1b), but when participants had already pleasant, generous, warm, kind, and nice, Cronbach’s α = .86, and r = engaged in the problematic task that rebels were standing up against .18, ns, between the two aggregates ranging from -3 to +3. (writing a speech supporting a widely unpopular policy), rebels were The Role by Rebellion ANOVA conducted on agency revealed a now liked significantly less than obedient others (supporting significant main effect for role, F(1,56) = 5.99, p = .02, MSE = 1.23, Prediction 1a). As posited above, this effect was obtained even partial η 2 = .10, qualified by a significant interaction, F(1,56) = 5.43, p though rebels never explicitly reproached the participants, nor would < .05, partial η 2 = .09. As predicted, observers saw rebels as more they ever concretely be in a position to do so, having left the agentic than obedient others, t(56) = 3.69, p < 001, whereas actors laboratory before the participants arrived. Yet the exact same thought that rebels were not more agentic than obedient others, t(56) = behavior led to liking or rejection, solely as a function of .08, ns. The same analysis on communion revealed a marginal main participants’ involvement in the problematic situation. conditions (actor vs. observer), participants were randomly assigned to one of two rebellion condition (obedient vs. rebel), yielding 4 cells. Stimuli. The “police decision task” was presented on a single sheet with three pictures. It started with “Imagine that a burglary has happened in a neighborhood, and the police have apprehended three suspects. Below are brief descriptions of the three suspects. Please consider these carefully and indicate who you think is most likely to be guilty.” Below these instructions were three photographs, each accompanied by some information (name, alibi, previous record, possessions when apprehended, action when apprehended, occupation), presented in tabular format. Under this information, the instructions went on, “Imagine that you are the detective in charge of this case. Please circle the face of the person who you think is most likely to have committed the burglary. In the space below, indicate the reasons for your suspicion,” followed by an empty box with eight blank lines. The information provided in the table was designed to incriminate the third suspect, Steven Jones: he had no alibi, he had a previous record, he was carrying cash and a screwdriver, and he was unemployed. Steven Jones was also the only African American in the display; the other two suspects were white. Participants encountered this task twice: once blank for them to complete, and once filled out to instantiate the rebellion manipulation. In the obedient condition, the African American face was circled, and the handwriting in the box said, “I think Steven Jones did it because 1) He’s got no real alibi, 2) He’s done it before, and 3) He’s carrying a lot of cash, especially for someone without a job. The screwdriver might have helped to break open a door etc.” In the rebel condition, no face was circled, and the box said, “I refuse to make a choice here – this task is obviously biased... Offensive to make black man the obvious suspect. I refuse to play this game.” Measures. Participants formed an impression of the alleged previous participant and reported this on a personality rating form similar to the one used in Study 1, except that the order of attraction and personality traits was reversed. They first indicated on eleven-point scales ranging from -5 (dislike very much) to +5 (like very much) how much they would like the other person to work on a project, as a friend, and as a roommate. They indicated how much they respected the other person on an eleven-point scale ranging from -5 (despise very much) to +5 (respect very much). In an open-ended format, they were asked to indicate the personality trait that they thought best described the other participant. Finally, they rated the other’s personality on 16 seven-point semantic differentials ranging from -3 to +3 and anchored at stupid-intelligent, weak-strong, unpleasant-pleasant, insecure- confident, immature-mature, passive-active, cruel-kind, awful-nice, cold-warm, dishonest-honest, unfair-fair, immoral-moral, dependent-independent, selfish- generous, low self-esteem-high self-esteem, and rude-polite. Study 2 was designed to provide a second demonstration of the rejection of moral rebels, in a less ambiguously moral domain (racism), and using the minimal case where the problematic compliance does not entail writing a tedious speech, but instead just pointing the finger at an obvious suspect. We replaced the morally problematic behavior of misrepresenting one’s views (Study 1) with going along with a racist task. The stimuli in this task reflected stereotypes about African Americans as criminals, and although bowing to the demands of the task did not per se reflect prejudice on the part of the participant, the moral rebel in Study 2 questioned whether it was even appropriate to take part in a situation that contains offensive elements. As in Study 1, we predicted that observers should like this stance more than obedience (Prediction 1b), whereas actors who complied with the task should prefer obedience (Prediction 1a). Rather than delve into traditional domains of conservative morality, in this study we used prejudice, an issue known to elicit compunction (see Devine, Monteith, Zuwerink, & Elliot, 1991) in an otherwise morally relativistic participant population. Students receive ample warnings from the day they arrive on campus about the ills of prejudice and discrimination, raising strong motivations not to be or be seen as prejudiced (Plant & Devine, 1998). Furthermore, the contemporary moral heroes that our participants have been exposed to even before graduating from high school are often involved in the fight against prejudice (e.g., MLK, Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, Oskar Schindler), thus reinforcing the link between prejudice and morality, and the exemplarity of standing up against it. Individuals who confront prejudice may be modern moral heroes, but they are typically less appealing to the targets of their invectives (Czopp, Monteith, & Mark, 2006). In Study 2, the moral rebel never directly confronted participants, but we varied his self-relevance by manipulating whether participants witnessed his refusal before or after they had complied with the racist task. In line with our “perversity of obedience” hypothesis (Hypothesis 1), we predicted that the same behavior, standing up against prejudice, would inspire liking or rejection, depending on this manipulation of threat. Excluded participants. Three participants (out of 56) expressed suspicion at debriefing and were not included in the analyses presented below. Only 4 picked a White suspect as the most likely culprit. Because we did not expect participants to be threatened by the rebel if they had not picked the African-American suspect, we excluded these 4 participants from subsequent analyses (leaving 49 valid participants). We repeated the main analyses with all 56 original participants, and found that patterns and significance level were the same with all participants. Is the rebellion moral? We first compared ratings of rebel and obedient others by observers (who, being more disinterested, should give us more of a baseline) on the immoral-moral semantic differential. Observers thought that rebels were significantly more moral (M = 1.17, SD = 1.19) than obedient others (M = .31, SD = .85), t(23) = 2.08, p < .05. This suggests that rebellion in the police decision task had a moral flavor for participants. Interestingly, looking at morality ratings for actors, there was absolutely no difference between rebels (M = .33, SD = 1.30) and compliant others (M = .33, SD = .39), as if actors refused to give rebels moral credit for their good deed. Attraction. We created an index of attraction to the target by averaging scores on liking as a friend, as a roommate, on a project, and respect (Cronbach’s α = .82), and conducted a Rebellion (rebel, observers who had not taken the task yet seemed to prefer the rebel, obedient) by Role (actor, observer) ANOVA on this index. As but this difference was not significant here (Prediction 1b was not predicted, we found a significant interaction between role and supported). rebellion, F(1,45) = 4.38, p = .04, MSE = 2.88, partial η 2 = .09, due to In Study 2 the significant interaction on the attraction variable the fact that actors marginally preferred the obedient other (M = .50, therefore seems to be driven by actors liking and respecting the rebel SD = 1.34) to the rebel (M = -.67, SD = 2.03), t (45) = 1.68, p <.10, d = (marginally) less, whereas in Study 1 not only did actors like the .71, whereas observers did not have a significant preference between rebel less than the compliant other, but observers also liked the rebel the rebel (M = .98, SD = 1.64) and the obedient target (M = .12, SD = significantly more. Interestingly, although observers in Study 2 did 1.71), t (45) = 1.27, p = .21, d = -.53. Neither of the main effects was not report liking and respecting the rebel any more, they did rate him significant, both ps > .20, partial η 2 < .04. or her significantly higher on the agency and the communion Open-ended responses. Although we have focused on continuous composites, driving a significant interaction in both cases. They also variables above, nowhere is the effect better grasped than by simply thought that the rebel was more moral than an obedient other. looking at the trait that participants suggested to describe the rebel: Because the placement of the trait ratings and the measures of Whereas observers called the rebel “strong” (twice), “strong-minded,” attraction was reversed in Study 2, it is possible that for observers to “independent,” “decisive,” “fair-minded,” “socially conscious,” start appreciating rebels, they need to reflect on the implication of “adamant,” or “not racist” (with only 3 observers calling the rebel their behavior, as they do when they rate their personality. Seeing the “proud,” “blunt,” or “self-righteous”), actors viewing the exact same attraction measures first in Study 2, they did not report attraction for stimulus called him “self-righteous” (twice), “defensive,” the rebel, though they did attribute more positive qualities to him or “opinionated,” “confused,” “easily offended,” and “racist” (with only her once they got to the trait rating task. 4 actors calling the rebel “stalwart,” “quirky,” “bold,” or “intelligent”). One issue that was not addressed in Study 2 was the identity of In fact, valence ratings of these traits in Studies 1 and 2 by judges the target. In particular, participants were not provided any blind to condition yield the same significant crossover interaction – we information about the target’s sex and ethnicity, and this could have do not present these analyses only because they are entirely redundant led participants to make different assumptions based on their with the Likert scale data. condition. These demographic assumptions might mediate the effect. Agency and communion. As before, we conducted a principal axes If, for example, participants assumed that the rebel standing against factor with a Promax rotation on the trait ratings. The scree plot this racism was African American, it would give a different meaning to time suggested 3 factors explaining 54% of the variance, and using the their act and change the nature of the threat for non-African- criterion that a trait needed to load on one (and only one) factor .45 or American respondents. The fact that our finding is an interaction higher to be included, we formed a first factor (agency) by averaging (i.e., that the rebel is sometimes liked more, and sometimes liked less) reduces this concern, but in the next studies we made sure to fair, and active (α = .88), a second factor (social skill) by averaging clearly identify the speaker’s sex and ethnicity in order to eliminate polite, pleasant, intelligent, and mature (α = .80), and a third factor this issue altogether. In Study 3, we specified that the target was male (communion) by averaging warm, nice, and generous (α = .72). In this and we used only male participants, and in Study 4 we used men and women but always matched gender of target with that of the new set of traits, kind did not join any factor, loading lower than .34 on participant. all 3. Agency correlated with social skills, r(47) = .36, p = .01, but not Having demonstrated the moderating role of involvement on significantly with communion, r(47) = .17, p = .25, whereas reactions to moral rebels in two studies, in the final two studies we communion and social skills correlated highest, r(47) = .40, p = .004. The Role by Rebellion ANOVA conducted on each of these three endeavored to demonstrate the psychological processes involved in factors revealed a significant interaction on agency, F(1,45) = 4.01, p bringing about resentment. Accordingly, Study 3 is a mediation = .05, MSE = .95, partial η 2 = .08, and a marginal one on communion, study in which we predict that the rejection of moral rebels can be F(1,45) = 3.38, p = .07, MSE = .51, partial η 2 = .07, but none for explained by the fear of being rejected by them (Hypothesis 2), social skills, F(1,45) < 1, ns, MSE = 1.06, partial η 2 = .02. None of the whereas Study 4 is a moderation study that will demonstrate the role main effects were significant, all p’s >.15, all partial η 2 ‘s <.05. Tests of of self-threat (Hypothesis 3). simple effects suggest that the agency interaction comes from observers rating the rebel more agentic than the compliant other, t(45) = 2.24, p = .03, whereas actors did not, t(45) = .61, p = .55, and that the marginal interaction on communion comes from observers The goal of study 3 was to show that the rejection of moral rebels perceiving the rebel as nicer than the compliant other, t(45) = 2.27, p = is a reaction to people’s perception that the rebels would reject them, .03, whereas actors did not, t(45) = .38, ns. presumably because they see them as less moral (Hypothesis 2). Though such judgment can be aversive in other domains, the particular sting of moral reproach (Sabini & Silver, 1982), as well as the centrality of morality in many people’s self-concept (Park, Study 2 replicates the crossover pattern observed in Study 1: Ybarra & Stanik, 2006), makes fear of implicit moral reproach a Whether participants liked someone taking a stand against a racist likely trigger of resentment. To test whether the sting of moral rebels situation more than a compliant target depended on participants’ own could be explained by the fear of disapproval, Study 3 tested the involvement in the task (supporting Hypothesis 1). Actors who had mediating role of imagined liking and respect in the effects described already gone along with the racist task liked the rebel less than an so far. We predicted that actors would expect to be rejected by rebels obedient other (marginally supporting Prediction 1a), whereas (Prediction 2a), and that resentment serves to defuse this rejection threat, and therefore that fear of rejection would mediate the rejection of moral rebels by actors (Prediction 2b). Instead of asking participants directly about imagined moral Excluded participants. Only 2 participants (out of 132) expressed reproach, which might be difficult for participants to articulate, or even suspicion. They were excluded from the rest of our analyses. self-threat, which we assumed participants would be reluctant to admit Thirteen actors picked one of the White targets as the likely suspect. if probed head-on, we tapped into imagined rejection by turning Because our hypothesis was predicated on the fact that actors have around the liking and respect questions used in Studies 1 and 2, and engaged in the problematic behavior, we did not predict resentment asking participants who had gone along with the task (actors) how for individuals having in some way already taken a stand. For that they thought they would be seen by the person whose completed the reason, we excluded from subsequent analyses these 13 actors, questionnaire they rated. leaving 117 valid participants, but as in previous studies, we repeated To assess other possible factors leading to the rejection of moral the main analyses with all 132 initial participants, and none of the rebels, in Study 3 we also asked participants who had done the task patterns or significance levels changed with all participants included. first (actors) to answer several other ancillary questions. First, we Attraction. As in previous studies, we computed an aggregate asked participants how satisfied they were with their choice right after variable of attraction by averaging the three liking variables and the making it, and then again after seeing the other’s choice. Second, we respect variable (Cronbach’s α = .86), with low values indicating included several items getting at how much rebels invalidated excuses more rejection. We conducted the role by rebellion ANOVA on this by reducing the perceived pull of situational demands. aggregate variable, and found a marginal main effect of role, Finally, to make sure that the effect observed in Studies 1 and 2 did F(1,113) = 3.24, p = .08, MSE = 3.12, qualified by the predicted not result from gender stereotypes (e.g., if the rebel is more likely to be significant two-way interaction, F(1,113) = 5.58, p = .02, partial η 2 = seen as male), or cross-gender perception (e.g., if men and women are .05. Overall, actors preferred obedient others (M = 1.63, SD = 1.15) differentially attracted by a agentic male), in Study 3 we used only to rebels (M = .53, SD = 2.27), t(113) = 2.33, p = .02, d = .61, male participants, and always specified that the target other was male whereas observers showed little preference (M = .27, SD = 1.47 vs. too. M = .71, SD = 1.923), t(113) = .98, ns, d = -.27. Imagined attraction. We next turn our attention to the imagined attraction measures collected for actors (2 actors left these blank and are not included in these analyses, leaving 54 valid). We created an aggregate score of imagined attraction by averaging the three scores of imagined liking and imagined respect by the other, all ranging from -3 to +3 (Cronbach’s α = .88), with low scores indicating more imagined rejection. As predicted (Prediction 2a), actors expected to be rejected by a rebel (M = -.88, SD = 1.94), but not by an obedient other (M = 1.5, SD = 1.13), t(52) = 5.33, p < .001. Mediation analyses. We tested whether imagined attraction mediated the impact of rebellion on attraction for actors (rebellion in the subsequent regression analyses is coded such that 0 is obedient and 1 is rebel), as illustrated in Figure 2. Actors rejected rebels more than obedient others, β = -.28, t(52) = -2.12, p = .04, and thought that rebels would reject them more than would obedient others, β = -.59, t(52) = -5, 33, p < .001. When we used both the rebellion manipulation and imagined attraction to predict attraction, imagined attraction was a significant predictor, β = .80, t(51) = 6.50, p < .001, whereas the rebellion manipulation was no longer significant, β = .20, t(51) = 1.58, ns, and this reduction was significant in a Sobel test, z = 4.12, p < .001. Furthermore, to make sure that imagined attraction was not actually a consequence of attraction (especially because it was measured later), we also tested an alternative mediational model where attraction mediated the relationship between rebellion and imagined attraction (See Figure 2, second panel). We already knew that rebellion significantly affected both imagined attraction and attraction (see above). We added a regression predicting imagined attraction with rebellion and attraction, and found that attraction was indeed a significant predictor, β = .56, t(51) = 6.50, p < .001, but also that the rebellion manipulation was still a highly significant predictor, β = -.44, t(51) = -5.01, p < .001. This analysis supports our confidence that imagined attraction is the mediator of attraction, and not the other way around. Happiness with choice and situational blame. Actors did not express less happiness with their own choice after seeing a rebel (M Imagined rejection thus seems to be an important factor in the rejection of rebels. We found little support, on the other hand, for the idea that rebels make individuals less happy with their own decision, or that rebels make individuals more aware that they could have gone beyond the pressures of the situation, although it is possible that these variables are less accessible for self-report, less willingly revealed, or were measured too late in the procedure. Going back to the imagined rejection mediator, it is striking that, as we pointed out earlier, participants had no reason to believe that they would ever meet the rebel, or, for that matter, that the rebel would ever see their response and thus get a chance to reject them. Thus the mediating cognition is not what the rebel will think, but what the rebel would have thought were he still around. The fact that the actual presence of the rejecting rebel is not necessary to yield rejection suggests that imagined rejection may be less a threat to an actual social relationship than a threat to one’s personal sense of integrity and self-worth. We propose that the thought that someone would reject you constitutes a threat to one’s “moral and adaptive adequacy” (Steele, 1988) – and that this threat triggers rejection. Study 4 tests this piece of the model. Study 3 suggests that moral rebels are resented by actors because of the perception that they would, if they could, reject others who do not take a similar position. This fits our model, which posits that the imagined rejection perceived in moral rebels is a threat to one’s sense of adequacy (Hypothesis 3). As we have noted, the moral rebel in = .53, SD = 1.43) than after seeing an obedient other (M = .67, SD = our studies is actually not in a position to judge participants, but we 1.40), t(52) = .34, ns, even when looked at as a difference from the argue that the simple fact that someone could look down on them measure taken just after their choice, t(52) = .37, ns. can shake participants’ self-confidence, and it is this sting that Next, we computed a score of situation blame by averaging the 3 triggers the rejection. Having shown the role of imagined reproach in choice variables [“Anyone would have picked the same suspect as I Study 3, in Study 4 we proceeded to show the implication of the self. did,” “The information presented was sufficient to lead me to the Specifically, we reasoned that if the rejection of moral rebels indeed correct choice,” and “I had no other choice but to select the most results from shaking participants’ self-confidence, then actors should obvious suspect”], into an aggregate that could range from -3 to +3 not feel a need to reject rebels if they have been secured in their sense (Cronbach’s α = .61). Actors who had seen someone rebel were of being a good, effective person (Prediction 3a). slightly less likely to blame the situation for their own choice (M = .24, Spencer, Fein, and Lomore (2001) showed that after receiving SD = 1.22) than if they had seen someone obey (M = .76, SD = 1.29), bogus negative feedback on an intelligence test, participants chose to but this difference was not significant, t(52) = 1.52, p = .14, d = .42. listen to a poorly-performing peer in preparation for a later interview, unless they had had the chance to write about an important value, in which case they preferred to listen to a highly-performing peer. Apparently this opportunity to self-affirm made an impressive peer As in Studies 1 and 2, Hypothesis 1 was supported in Study 3: more palatable, despite the recent setback of the intelligence test. Reactions to moral rebels depended on participants’ own involvement Along similar lines, and in line with self-affirmation theory (Steele, in the task. Actors who had gone along with the task liked a rebel less 1988; Sherman & Cohen, 2007), we predicted that buttressing than a compliant other (supporting Prediction 1a), whereas mere participants’ sense of adequacy by giving them a chance to reflect on observers did not show this preference (Prediction 1b was, as in Study one of their important values or qualities would shield them from the 2, not supported). By tapping into imagined rejection, Study 3 enabled sting of imagined rejection and would therefore reduce the need to us to go beyond demonstrating the rejection of moral rebels to start put down moral rebels (Prediction 3a). looking at the causes leading up to it. The mediation analyses suggest In essence we predicted that self-affirmed actors in Study 4 that the rejection of rebels by actors can be explained as a reaction to would resemble uninvolved observers in Studies 1 to 3. Prior the sense that one would be rejected by the person taking the moral research suggests that self-affirmation can reduce the tendency to high ground, as demonstrated by the facts that actors did expect to be deny or skew information that is threatening to one’s beliefs, and liked less by the rebel (Prediction 2a), and that the effect of rebellion thus reduce the impact of one’s initial point of view on the on rejection was mediated by imagined rejection (Prediction 2b). processing of new information (e.g., Cohen, Aronson, & Steele, Further, a test of the alternative model suggests that the reverse is not 2000). We predicted that self-affirmation would similarly give actors true: It is unlikely that imagined rejection is the result of rejection, as some distance, both reducing their need to reject the rebel (Prediction the impact of rebellion on imagined rejection is still highly significant 3a, above) and allowing them to recognize the value of the rebel’s when rejection is included in the analysis. behavior as a moral, agentic choice – possibly to the point of point scale ranging from -5 (dislike very much) to +5 (like very much), with an questioning their own (Prediction 3b). unlabeled midpoint of 0. They indicated how much they respected the other participant on a similar 11-point scale ranging from -5 (despise a great deal) to +5 A secondary goal of Study 4 was to determine whether the (respect a great deal), then indicated the personality trait that they thought best rejection of moral rebel serves to reduce the kind of negative affect or described the other participant (open-ended), and finally rated the other participant psychological discomfort assumed to accompany cognitive dissonance on the 14 semantic differentials on 7-point scales with a midpoint of 0 (neither) and (Festinger, 1957). We thus added measures of self-reported affect and with the following poles: stupid-intelligent, strong-weak, unpleasant-pleasant, discomfort, varying whether they were presented before or after the funny-not funny, confident-insecure, immature-mature, active-passive, cruel-kind, nice-awful, cold-warm, honest-dishonest, unfair-fair, moral-immoral, and opportunity to put down the rebel. The placement of these measures dependent-independent. could be important, because if a process serves to reduce discomfort, On the following page, participants rated their own morality relative to other discomfort should be high when measured before it, but lower when students on campus, on a scale ranging from 0% (you are the least moral student measured after (cf. Elliot & Devine, 1994). on campus) to 100% (you are the most moral student on campus), and a midpoint of 50% (average). Then, under the heading “mood and emotion survey,” they answered the question “How do you feel right now?” (emphasis included) by rating each of the following 24 states on a scale ranging from 1 (does not apply at all) to 7 (applies very much): disappointed with myself, good, uncomfortable, happy with myself, determined, annoyed with myself, happy, guilty, comfortable with myself, peaceful, uneasy, disgusted with myself, excited, pleased with myself, energetic, angry with myself, bothered, friendly, dissatisfied with myself, fatigued, self- critical, optimistic, secure with myself, and lonely. Finally, they rated their agreement with the following items introduced in Study 3 on a 7-point scale ranging from -3 (strongly disagree) to +3 (strongly agree): “I am very happy with my choice of a suspect”; “My choice is representative of my attitudes and values”; “Anyone would have picked the same suspect as I did”; “The information presented was sufficient to lead me to the correct choice”; and “I had no other choice but to select the most obvious subject.” On the same page, they indicated how the other participant would like and respect them after seeing their own answers on the police decision making task, using the first three scales used to rate the other participant. Suspicion. Eleven participants expressed suspicion during debriefing and were excluded from the following analyses. Only one participant was excluded for not picking the African American suspect (Steven) in the police decision task, leaving 67 valid participants (44 men, 23 women). As before, we repeated the main analyses with all 79 participants included, but patterns and significance levels were the same with all participants included. Placement of affect measures. The placement of affect measures in the rebel control condition did not have a significant impact on any of the variables analyzed below. For ease of presentation, we collapsed the two orders into the rebel control condition in subsequent analyses, and will only mention order again when it is most relevant, i.e., in the analysis of affect measures. Self-affirmation manipulation checks. Participants in the rebel self-affirmation condition confirmed that their chosen value was very important, M = 3.42, SD = .61, on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not important at all) to 4 (extremely important). The values chosen varied from physical [fitness, athletic ability (4 times)] and other skills (performances as a poet, artistic skills-creativity, business skills, social skills), to desirable personality traits (patience, spontaneity, romantic values, keeping contact with friends and family), with only a minority of morality-related traits [loyalty (twice), honesty, generosity, ability to help others, and concern/care for someone in need]. We counted the number of words used by participants, and found that participants did not use significantly more words in the rebel self-affirmation condition (M = 115, SD = 39) than in the rebel control condition (M = 110, SD = 51), t (64) = .69, ns. By this rough metric at least, we had no reason to believe that participants in the self-affirmation condition expanded more effort than participants in the rebel control condition. Mediation of rebel rejection. We created a composite for imagined attraction by averaging the 3 questions asking the participant to imagine how much the other person would like and respect them (α = .87), and tested first whether it mediated the difference between the obedient and the rebel control conditions. Using a dummy code pitting the rebel control condition (1) against the obedient condition (0), rebels were expected to like participant less, β = -.60, t(46) = -5.12, p < .001, and when both rebellion and imagined attraction were entered to predict attraction, imagined attraction was a significant predictor, β = .38, t(45) = 2.16, p = .04, whereas the rebellion manipulation, which had been a significant predictor on its own, β = -.41, t(46) = -3.07, p = .004 , was no longer so with the mediator included, β = -.20, t(45) = -1.24, p = .22, Sobel z = -2.00, p < .05. As in Study 3, the reverse causal order was not supported because rebellion still predicted imagined attraction when attraction was controlled for, β = -.49, t(45) = -3.96, p < .001. Self-affirmation and imagined attraction. Participants in the rebel self-affirmation condition expected a lukewarm reaction from the other participant (M = -.58), definitely cooler than in the obedient condition (M = 1.00), t(64) = 2.76, p = .01, and only marginally warmer than in the rebel control condition (M = -1.52), t(64) = 1.80, Please refer to Table 1 for means and standard deviations of the p = .08. Does this marginal boost in imagined attraction explain why main variables analyzed below, as well as oneway ANOVAs, MSEs, self-affirmed participants did not reject a rebel? To test this, we and pair-wise comparisons between means. conducted a mediation analysis using a dummy code pitting the rebel Attraction (Table 1). The three groups differed significantly on an control condition (0) against the rebel self-affirmation condition (1). attraction composite of liking to work on a project, liking as a friend, As above, affirmation marginally increased imagined attraction, β = and respect (α = .88). Replicating previous studies, non-affirmed .27, t(46) = 1.93, p = .06, and when both variables were entered in actors liked the rebel significantly less (M = .02) than the obedient the equation, imagined attraction was significant, β = .36, t(45) = other (M = 1.88 – see Figure 3). More important, self-affirmed 2.95, p = .005, but self-affirmation was still a highly significant 4 participants showed no such rejection of the rebel (M = 2.54) . predictor, β = .39, t(45) = 3.19, p = .003, and not significantly Morality (Table 1). Non-affirmed actors did not rate a rebel reduced by the inclusion of imagined attraction, Sobel z = 1.61, p = significantly more moral (M = 1.41) than an obedient target (M = .11. Thus the more clement view of rebels by self-affirmed 1.11), but self-affirmed participants did (M = 2.42). participants does not seem to result from expecting to be liked better. Agency and communion (Table 1). The scree plot in a principal axes factor analysis with a Promax rotation on the 14 bipolar trait items suggested 2 factors, together accounting for 45% of the variance. A criterion loading of .40 excluded “funny” (both loadings Identifying factors. A principal axes factor analysis with a Promax below .16) but otherwise yielded a non-overlapping solution: rotation on the 24 affect items suggested 3 factors (scree plot communion (α = .84) comprising nice, kind, pleasant, warm, fair, and method) capturing 56% of the variance. A loading cutpoint of .45 mature; and agency (α = .82, correlated .46 with communion, p < excluded “friendly” (loadings < .42) and “uncomfortable” (loadings .001) comprising strong, independent, intelligent, honest, secure, < .34), but otherwise yielded non-overlapping factors: negative affect moral, and active. As is apparent in Table 1, communion was (α = .90), which comprised disgusted with myself, angry with significantly lower in the rebel control condition (M = .25) than in both myself, dissatisfied with myself, disappointed with myself, annoyed the obedient (M = .83) and the rebel self-affirmation condition (M = with myself, fatigued, guilty, bothered, lonely, and self-critical; .87). In contrast, agency was significantly higher in the rebel self- positive affect – high arousal [α = .89, r(65) = -.41, p = .001, with affirmation condition (M = 2.10) than in both the compliant (M = 1.34) negative affect], comprising energetic, excited, happy, pleased with and the rebel control condition (M = 1.44). myself, determined, good, happy with myself, and optimistic; and positive affect – low arousal [α = .82, r(65) = -.65 with negative affect, and r(65) = .59 with positive affect – high arousal, both p < .001], comprising secure with myself, peaceful, comfortable with myself, and uneasy (reversed). No mean differences between groups. As mentioned in the preliminary analyses, the placement of these measures in the rebel control condition did not affect any of these measures significantly, all three t(63) < .5, p’s > .6. After collapsing these two orders into the rebel control condition, we did not find any significant difference between the three groups either, all three F(2,64) < 2.0, p’s > .15. In Rebel Rebel Obedient Control Self-Affirmation M SD M SD M SD F(2,64) MSE Attraction Communion Morality Agency Imagined attraction Happiness with choice Situation blame 19 29 19  Table 1. particular, the rebel self-affirmation condition did not generate line with their tendency to face the music, self-affirmed participants more positive affect than other conditions, ruling out the possibility did (M = .26). that it was merely a mood manipulation (Sherman & Cohen, 2006). Situational blame ( Table 1). Similarly, the tendency to blame the Given the high correlations between measures, we created an overall situation [computed by averaging “I had no other choice but to select affect composite averaging all 24 affect items after reversing the the most obvious suspect,” “Anyone would have picked the same positive items (α = .94), but again we observed no significant suspect as I did,” and “The information presented was sufficient to difference between group means, F(2,64) = 1.63, p = .20, or between lead me to the correct choice” (α = 69)] was significantly lower in orders within the rebel control condition, t(63) < .2, ns. the rebel self-affirmation condition (M = -.07) than in the rebel How does it feel to reject the other? To test whether different control condition (M = 1.03), itself similar to the obedient condition feelings might be associated with attraction in the three conditions, we (M = 1.42). conducted a regression predicting attraction with the overall affect composite (standardized), two dummy codes capturing the rebel control and the rebel self-affirmation condition, and two product terms of the dummy codes and the standardized affect composite. Reflecting Study 4 was designed to demonstrate that the rejection of moral that rebels are liked less than obedient others, the dummy code for the rebels is a reaction to a threat to the self. Whereas we once more rebel control condition was a significant predictor, t(61) = -2.93, p = observed rebel rejection among actors (supporting Prediction 1a) in .005. More germane to the matter at hand, the product between this the two cells where judging the other was preceded by a mundane dummy code and the affect composite was also a significant predictor, task (listing what one had eaten for 48 h prior to the study), rebels t(61) = 2.80, p = .007 (all other t’s < 1.3, ns): Whereas rejecting an were no longer rejected if participants first had a chance to feel obedient other was associated with negative affect, r(17) = -.45, p = secured in their sense of moral and adaptive adequacy by recalling a .05, rejecting a rebel was associated with positive affect, r(27) = .41 5 , recent experience when they demonstrated an important quality or p = .03. For self-affirmed participants, their reaction to the rebel seems value (supporting Prediction 3a). Self-affirmed actors liked and detached from affect, r(17) = .04, ns, though the fact that the respected a moral rebel as much as actors liked and respected a corresponding interaction term was not significant in the regression compliant other, looking very much like uninvolved observers in makes unclear whether this apparent departure from the obedient Studies 1 to 3 who were not threatened by the rebel’s stance. condition is reliable. The fact that secure participants did not feel a need to put down moral rebels suggests that when actors do put down moral rebels, it results from a threat to one’s sense of self-worth and integrity. As in Study 3, we found that the rejection of moral rebels was mediated by Ratings of one’s moral standing (Table 1). When asked for an imagined rejection (supporting Hypothesis 2); Self-affirmed estimate of their morality percentile, participants reported on average participants expected marginally less rejection, but that did not that they were more moral than two thirds of their peers (M = 67%, SD explain the difference. They knew that rebels would probably not = 15%), but this did not vary by condition, F(2,64) < 1, ns. hold them in high regard, yet they did not seem to care – they still did Happiness with choice (Table 1). As in Study 3, participants did not not mind them. In fact, they were the only group for whom report less happiness with their choice of suspect in the rebel control attraction/rejection was not related to how they were feeling. condition (M = 1.24) than in the obedient condition (M = 1.32), but in Self-affirmed participants’ ability to take stock of the rebel’s stance without lashing back or denying its value went beyond merely not minding rebels despite imagined rejection. In support of Prediction 3a, self-affirmed participants seemed better able to give credit when credit was due: In contrast to participants in the rebel control condition, they saw the rebel as particularly moral and agentic, claimed to like and respect the rebel as much as non-affirmed actors reported being less happy with their choice than participants seeing an liked a compliant target – and declared that the rebel was especially obedient other, and even saw that they might not have been as moral. Together, these studies consistently demonstrate that rebels constrained by the situation as they thought at the time. can elicit resentment and rejection in individuals who failed to take Does this clemency and clear-sightedness in the self-affirmation such a principled stance and who experience the rebellion as a condition result from mere distraction? Did it make them lose sight of personal rejection. the rebel they were rating, did it make them forget about their own In his Theory of Justice (1999), philosopher John Rawls famously choice, or did it engage them more than the control condition? Our posited (p.118) that a fair procedure to generate just principles is to data provide little support for either of these three possibilities. First, elevate individuals above “specific contingencies that put men at the essay was always written before participants saw both the odds” and to assume that they are behind a “veil of ignorance” as to completed questionnaire and the ratings sheet, so it would not have the their position in society. Our observer participants were in many ability to distract them from the completed questionnaire that they ways in Rawls’ ideal position, by not knowing how they would have based their ratings on. Second, after recording their choice, we acted in this situation. Not being involved, they were able to intentionally always left the completed sheet on the table facing the appreciate the morality and strength of character of the rebel (Study participants, so while doing the ratings they had three sheets in front of 2), and even to like and respect him more (Study 1). It is in fact them: their completed questionnaire and the target’s side by side, and noteworthy that the strongest observer effect (Prediction 2b) was the blank rating sheet. So it is unlikely they forgot about either their observed in Study 1, when observers were not even in the laboratory, choice or that of the rebel. Third, we made sure that the writing time but approached a month later outside of the experimental situation. was the same in all three conditions, so our best available index of Interestingly, Rawls’ veil of ignorance goes beyond not knowing engagement was to count the number of words used in the various one’s position in the social structure: “Nor, again, does anyone know conditions – and as reported above, participants in the rebel self- his conception of the good,” he writes later on the same page. In light affirmation condition did not write significantly more words that of our studies, one sees the wisdom of this recommendation; indeed, participants in the food-listing condition. For these three reasons, it is stepping foot in the situation as an unquestioning actor seems to unlikely that the increased attraction for rebels in the personal essay change one’s very “conception of the good,” and where an observer condition results from distraction. Instead, we believe that the boost in behind the veil of ignorance sees a brave moral exemplar, an actor self-confidence resulting from contemplating an important feature of down in the trenches sees a self-righteous pest. one’s identity was what enabled participants in the personal essay condition to weather the threat of the moral rebel. How did the data specifically support our hypotheses, as spelled out in the introduction? Hypothesis 1, the interaction pattern, was supported in every study where it could be tested (1, 2 and 3). In four studies, we investigated why those doing the right thing are Prediction 1a, that actors would dislike the rebel compared to a not always embraced by others, and we showed that reactions to moral compliant other, was supported in nearly every study (significant in rebels largely depend on whether their principled stance is perceived 1, 3, and 4; marginal in 2). Prediction 1b, that observers would prefer as an implicit rejection of those who went along with the problematic a compliant other to the rebel, was supported in Study 1, but not in situation. When fictitious rebels refused to write a deceitful speech or Studies 2 and 3 (and could not be tested in Study 4). As is apparent in to collaborate in a racist decision task, they were liked more than Table 2, which summarizes effect sizes for Hypothesis 1, Predictions (Study 1) or as much as (Studies 2 and 3) obedient others by 1a and 1b, the effect predicted in Prediction 1b was actually always uninvolved observers, but less than obedient others by participants in the right direction (in fact the average d observed across studies who had already gone along with the morally problematic behavior was -.51), but consistently smaller than the effect predicted in (Studies 1 to 4). Prediction 1a (average d = .86). It is important to realize, however, Study 1 showed this phenomenon using a modified induced that the relative support for Prediction 1a and Prediction 1b is also a compliance paradigm, where low-choice participants who had written function of the stimuli used: By creating a more likable rebel, we a counter-attitudinal speech disliked a peer refusing to write the speech, although observers liked the rebel more than an obedient participant. In Study 2, rebels who refused to make a choice in a whodunit task where the obvious suspect was African American were Effect sizes on attraction per study, and significance level of disliked by participants already implicated in the task, but not by corresponding test (**: p < .01; *: p < .05; †: p < .10). Positive observers, who called the rebel more moral. In both studies, the exact numbers on Cohen’s ds mean a preference for the compliant other same behavior was judged quite differently depending on the over the rebel. perceiver’s own involvement. Going beyond these initial two demonstration studies, the last two studies cast light on the roots of this resentment. Study 3 demonstrates that resentment is a defensive reaction to the perception that rebels are implicitly rejecting those who do not question the situation: Indeed, the rejection of rebels was mediated by the belief that the rebel would reject others who did not rebel. Finally, in Study 4, we showed that this defensive reaction results from a threat to one’s self-confidence: When participants were self-affirmed prior to seeing the rebel, they might still obtain the predicted interaction (Hypothesis 1), because freedom is a notoriously difficult enterprise (see Gosling, Denizeau observers like the rebel significantly more (Prediction 1b), whereas & Oberlé, 2006), but the data available to us at this point does not actors might now rate him or her as likeable as the compliant other strongly support this existential interpretation, reinforcing our (and Prediction 1a would seem unsupported). In fact, this is what we confidence in our imagined rejection / self-threat model. obtain on agency, a dimension where our constructed rebel clearly Feeling less moral than the rebel. One reason why realizing the stood above the compliant other: In both studies where they could (1 existence of a more righteous path is threatening could be that, along and 2), observers rated the rebel significantly more agentic (Prediction with the imagined moral reproach documented in this paper, it could 1b), whereas actors (in Studies 1, 2, or 4) never gave rebels credit for lead individuals to question their own morality. This threat may be being agentic (Prediction 1a). Similarly, observers rated the rebel more akin to upward social comparison (Festinger, 1954), only applied to moral when they had this opportunity (Study 2), whereas actors did morality. Resentment could be a defensive measure if perceivers feel not. that their own morality pales in comparison to the rebel’s. Of course, In regard to Hypotheses 2 and 3, that the rejection of moral rebels is individuals excel at trivializing other people’s positive behavior by a reaction to a threat to the self stemming from imagined rejection, attributing it to social factors rather than internal dispositions evidence for that contention comes from at least three different (Ybarra, 2002), so rebels will likely not be granted moral superiority sources: First, when participants were mere observers (in Studies 1 to in many cases; but if the moral stance is unambiguous enough, one 3), the same rebel target did not elicit rejection, and if anything, was could assume that conformists start questioning their own morality. more appealing than a compliant other (significant in Study 1). The As Nietzsche wrote, “arrogance on the part of the meritorious is even importance of self-involvement was the first hint that the underlying more offensive to us than the arrogance of those without merit, for effect was based on self-threat. Second, the mediating role of merit itself is offensive” (1878, Aphorism 332) – thus sometimes it imagined rejection (Predictions 2a and 2b, supported in both Studies 3 may not be the perceived self-righteousness of rebels that people are and 4) suggests that the effect is driven by the realization that the reacting to, but the threatening thought that they may be on to adequacy of their choice could be questioned. Third, the role of self- something. Rather than dwell on this unpleasant thought, individuals threat may have been best demonstrated when participants who at first may lash out against superior others as they do when others are wrote about an important quality or value did not reject the rebel target superior in ability (Major et al., 1991; Salovey et al., 1991; Tesser, at all (Prediction 3a, supported in Study 4). Feeling secure in their 1991), all the more strongly because of the centrality of morality in sense of adequacy, these participants were apparently not threatened people’s self-image (Park et al., 2006; Allison et al., 1989). Though by the rebel’s behavior, or the fact that he or she would probably this interpretation is also compelling, it does not fit the data presented dislike them – and as a result, they did not derogate. In fact, they saw here very well either. First, although unthreatened participants rebels as moral and agentic, expressed misgivings about their own (observers in Study 2, affirmed actors in Study 4) did describe the behavior in light of the rebel’s stance, and blamed their own behavior rebel as more moral than the compliant other, threatened actors in less on situational factors (Prediction 3b, supported in Study 4) than these studies rebels did not – suggesting that they were able to deny did participants who were not self-affirmed. the rebel any moral credit for his or her stance. Second, when we measured it (Study 4) participants did not report feeling any less moral after seeing the rebel, nor did they report more self-directed negative emotions (e.g., disappointed with myself), even when this measure came before the opportunity to derogate the rebel. And Existential freedom. The idea that individuals are more comfortable finally, although a social comparison interpretation could reasonably turning a blind eye to their own freedom and attributing their include the presence of imagined rejection, it should not mediate the problematic choices to situational pressures has a venerable past in effect as it does in Studies 3 and 4. Thus we find little support for this philosophy (Sartre, 1958), clinical psychology (Fromm, 1941) and social comparison story in our data, strengthening our faith in the social psychology (Festinger, 1957). Are rebels resented because they self-threatening impact of imagined rejection. shatter the comfort of conformity, and remind actors that they were Rejection by whom? Imagined rejection seems responsible for the free all along? Indeed, individuals might not have thought of rebellion self-threat that triggers rejection. But who is the source of this as a behavioral option until rebels made them realize that it was imagined rejection, and does it need to be restricted to the rebel? The available. As one of Milgram’s obedient participants recounts at questions used to test mediation in Studies 3 and 4 ask how debriefing, “the thought of stopping didn’t enter my mind until it was participants think they would be seen by “the other participant” (i.e., put there by the other two [rebels]” (1965, p.132). Although this is a the compliant or rebel other) – and as already reported, these compelling narrative, we find little support for it in our data. In Study questions mediate the effect. It is conceivable, however, that 1, participants did report significantly more perceived choice after participants would anticipate a similar rejection from a random seeing the rebel, but this did not correlate significantly with rejection. bystander who witnessed both their obedience and the rebel’s stance, When we measured it again in Studies 3 and 4, we did not observe and that this generic imagined rejection would similarly mediate the significantly less situational blame (e.g., “I had no other choice but to effect. We suspect that this mediation would obtain, though it may be select the most obvious suspect”) when participants saw a rebel than weaker than the observed results, and we propose that it would be when they saw a compliant other. Interestingly, self-affirmed compatible with our model. Our contention is that imagined rejection participants who saw a rebel in Study 4 did blame the situation is threatening, and that the mere existence of the rebel makes actors significantly less than participants seeing an obedient other, as if they fear that they will be rejected or looked down upon, by the rebel or were secure enough to admit the freedom that rebels so clearly others. The imaginary and quasi-projective nature of this mediator demonstrated, but non-affirmed participants did not report less makes it less consequential to know who is doing the imagined situational blame. Measuring perceived choice and experienced rejection.  content and all of the mainstream social psychological traditions touched upon in this section (see also Monin, Pizarro, & Beer, 2007). We started with the puzzling observation that the same laudable rebellion was admired by some, and reviled by others. The studies presented here suggest the importance of involvement as a moderator of this reaction, because involved individuals perceive rebellion against a situation that they tacitly accepted as a personal rejection. Individuals reacted to this imagined rejection by rejecting rebels. Such defensiveness greatly limits the potential impact of moral leaders in society: If a minimal involvement in the situation is enough to trigger rejection, one can imagine the weight of a lifetime of passivity when individuals see someone take a moral stance against the way they live, or refuse to ignore flagrant injustices right under their noses. By casting light on these rejection processes, we hope to pave the way for research on the way moral rebels can be agents of change without eliciting resentment. This research represents, to our knowledge, the first systematic investigation of the rejection of moral rebels. It casts light on the causes of the phenomenon, raises novel research questions and points to directions for future investigation. It also informs a number of social psychological literatures at the same time as it draws on them: 1. It contributes to the literature on deviance from group norms, by showing that reactions to deviants can be largely dependent on the judge’s own past behavior, and by showing that the same deviant can be perceived as normative by some (seen in fact as more moral) and rejected by others. 2. It contributes to the literature on social comparison by showing that other people’s behavior can be threatening not just when it appears superior, but also indirectly when it implies that others might look down on us (see also Monin, 2007). 3. It contributes to the self-affirmation literature by documenting a new source of self-threat, and by showing a new consequence of self- affirmation, the equanimity and benevolence towards a threatening rebel that we observed in Study 4. 4. It contributes to the attraction literature by showing the complex interplay between exemplary behavior, imagined rejection, and self- confidence in determining who we like and who we do not. 5. It contributes to the prejudice reduction literature by showing that individuals who protest racist practices will have greatest appeal to those outside of the situation, unless they manage to make individuals in the situation somehow secure in their sense that they are good people. 6. Finally, it contributes to moral psychology by demonstrating that moral exemplars do not always receive the respect that they are supposed to inspire, and by showing possible bridges between moral Allison, S.T., Messick, D.M., & Goethals, G.R. (1989). On being better but not smarter than others: The Muhammad Ali effect. Social Cognition, 7(3): 275- 295. Aquino, K., & Reed, A. II. (2002). The self-importance of moral identity. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 83, 1423-1440. Aronson, J., Blanton, H, & Cooper, J. (1995). From dissonance to disidentification: Selectivity in the self-affirmation process. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology,68(6), 986-996. Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity: A minority of one against a unanimous majority. Psychological Monographs,70 (416). BBC News (2006). My Lai massacre hero dies at 62. January 6 th , 2006. Cohen, G.L., Aronson, J., & Steele, C.M. (2000). When beliefs yield to evidence: Reducing biased evaluation by affirming the self. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26(9), 1151-1164. Cooper, J., & Fazio, R. (1984). A new look at dissonance theory. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 229-266. Czopp, A.M., Monteith, M.J., & Mark, A.Y. (2006). Standing up for change: Reducing bias through interpersonal confrontation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90(5), 784-803. Devine, P.G., Monteith, M.J., Zuwerink, J.R., & Elliot, A.J. (1991). Prejudice with and without compunction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60: 817-830. Elliot, A. J., & Devine, P. G. (1994). On the motivational nature of cognitive dissonance: Dissonance as psychological discomfort. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 382–394. Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations. Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. New York, NY: Harper & Row. Frankena, W.K. Ethics, 2 nd Ed. (1973). Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Fromm, E. (1941). Escape from freedom. New York, NY: Rinehart and Co. Galinsky, A.D., Stone, J., & Cooper, J. (2000). The reinstatement of dissonance and psychological discomfort following failed affirmations. European Journal of Social Psychology, 30, 123-147. Gosling, P., Denizeau, M., & Oberlé, D. (2006). Denial of responsibility: A new mode of dissonance reduction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 722-733. Latané, B., & Darley, J.M. (1970). The unresponsive bystander: Why doesn’t he help? Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Maas, P. (1973). Serpico: The cop who defied the system. New York, NY: Viking Press. Major, B., Testa, M., & Bylsma, W.H. (1991). Responses to upward and downward social comparisons: The impact of esteem-relevance and perceived control. In J. Suls and T.A. Wills (Eds.), Social comparison: Contemporary theory and research. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ. “Reading week should be eliminated at [this university]. It just causes a number of problems. First, it breaks the momentum of the quarter, it also allows students less time to receive knowledge from the faculty, which is one of the reasons we’re in school in the first place, right? We would learn more stuff with another week of classes. Other universities have more contact time with the professors and it would make us more comparable with these other schools. These universities don’t seem to be hurt by not having a reading week. Students tend to waste a lot of time during reading week and they’d be better served by an extra week of classes. Also, because some of the schools at [this university] have a reading week and others don’t, eliminating reading week would make the schedules equivalent across the schools at [this university].” “So now I’m supposed to make a speech saying that reading week is a bad thing and that we should eliminate it, right? Well you know what? I don’t think I’m going to do that. I know I was told to do it and I’m, like, a subject in the study but I’m still free to do whatever I want, right? And I’m not going to do something that I’m not 100% comfortable doing, like making the speech just because I’m told to. I’m sure that’s my right as a participant in this experiment. I won’t do it. There you have it- my official refusal. On tape and all. You can keep your money or whatever, I’d rather not get anything and not do something I have a problem with.” Scher, S.J., & Cooper, J. (1989). Motivational basis of dissonance: the singular role of behavioral consequences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56(6), 899-906. Sherman, D.K., & Cohen, G.L. (2006). The psychology of self-defense: Self- affirmation theory. In M.P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183-242). New York: Academic Press. Spencer, S. J., Fein, S., & Lomore, C. D. (2001). Maintaining one’s self-image vis- à-vis others: The role of self-affirmation in the social evaluation of the self. Motivation and Emotion, 25, 41–65. Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261–302). New York: Academic Press. Tangney, J.P., & Dearing, R.L. (2002). Shame and guilt. New York: Guilford Press. Tesser, A. (1991). Emotion in social comparison and reflection processes. In J. Suls and T.A. Wills (Eds.), Social comparison: Contemporary theory and research. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum,. Turiel, E. (1983). The development of social knowledge: Morality and convention. Cambridge University Press. Walker, L.J., & Hennig, K.H. (2004). Differing conceptions of moral exemplarity: Just, brave, and caring. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86(4), 629-647. Ybarra, O. (2002). Naïve causal understanding of valenced behaviors and its implication for social information processing. Psychological Bulletin, 128(3), 421-441. Zanna, M., & Cooper, J. (1974). Dissonance and the pill: an attribution approach to studying the arousal properties of dissonance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 29(5):703-709.
