P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Research Article

Night and Day, You Are the One
On Circadian Mismatches and the Transference Effect in
Social Perception
Arie W. Kruglanski1 and Antonio Pierro2
1

University of Maryland, College Park, and 2University of Rome ‘‘La Sapienza’’

ABSTRACT—A study examined the relation between individuals’ circadian rhythm and their tendency to exhibit
transference effects in social perception. Individuals tested
at times of circadian mismatch (i.e., morning persons
tested in the evening and evening persons tested in the
morning) exhibited more pronounced transference effects
than individuals tested at times of circadian match (i.e.,
morning persons tested in the morning and evening persons tested in the evening). These ﬁndings are compatible
with the notion that transference effects represent everyday social-cognitive functioning related to activation of
social schemata. Additionally, however, they suggest that
transference effects are not the inevitable consequence of
activating the signiﬁcant other’s schema. Rather, such effects might be particularly likely to occur when an individual’s mental resources are limited, as might be the case
during circadian mismatches. This latter suggestion differs from psychodynamic views of transference as exclusively a driven, energy-intensive phenomenon.

The phenomenon of transference has been hailed as fundamental to the process of dynamic psychotherapy (Ehrenreich,
1989; Freud, 1912/1958; Greenberg & Mitchell, 1983; Horney,
1939, 1945; Luborsky & Crits-Christoph, 1990; Sullivan,
1940, 1953). In Studies on Hysteria, Freud (1895/1955)
depicted transference as uniquely tied to the analyst-patient
relationship, reﬂecting amorous feelings that the patient may
harbor toward the analyst and involving a transposition of affect
from the patient’s old relationship onto the current relationship
with the therapist. For Freud (e.g., 1910/1957, 1914/1958),
transference represented a neurosis based on a mesalliance
(false connection) between the patient’s memories of a past rela-

Address correspondence to Arie W. Kruglanski, Department of
Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, e-mail:
kruglanski@gmail.com.

296

tionship and the therapeutic context. Speciﬁcally, the content of
a past wish was inappropriately linked with the person of the
analyst. ‘‘As a result of this mesalliance . . . the same affect is
produced which had forced the patient long before to repudiate
the forbidden wish’’ (Freud, 1895/1955, p. 303).
Transference neurosis, as Freud (1914/1958) labeled it, was
considered an important ingredient of the psychoanalytic cure.
Through the energy of the transferred affects, the patient was
thought to remember forgotten, unconscious mental attitudes. At
the same time, transference was also thought to reﬂect a powerful
resistance to treatment (Freud, 1912/1958); that is, transforming
the therapeutic relationship into one of personal affective involvement with the analyst was viewed as a means to escape the
arduous and aversive process of analytic ‘‘working through.’’
Clinical views of transference have typically portrayed it as
a forceful phenomenon likely to require considerable investment
of mental resources. Whether representing a misguided channeling of libido (Freud, 1912/1958, p. 100), resistance to treatment (Freud, 1912/1958, p. 101), or the need for tenderness and
connectedness with the other (Sullivan, 1953), the transference
experience has generally been depicted as highly energetic and
intense. For Jung (1968/1975), transference ‘‘intensity conforms
to the signiﬁcance of content projected. A strong [and] violent
transference corresponds to a burning content: it contains
something of importance, something of big value for the patient’’
(pp. 142–143).
A very different, social-cognitive, interpretation of transference has been offered by Andersen and her colleagues (e.g.,
Andersen & Berk, 1998; Andersen & Chen, 2002; Andersen
& Cole, 1990). In their analysis, the transference phenomenon transcends the therapeutic context, and constitutes part
and parcel of everyday social perception. Much like stereotypes,
social categories, or schemata, mental representations of signiﬁcant others may be activated from memory and applied to
newly encountered individuals who resemble those signiﬁcant
others in some ways. In the same way that early behavioral
information may activate a general person schema (e.g., of a

Copyright
r 2008at Association
for Psychological
Downloaded from
pss.sagepub.com
Bobst Library, New
York University onScience
April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 3

Arie W. Kruglanski and Antonio Pierro

‘‘kind,’’ ‘‘hostile,’’ or ‘‘honest’’ individual) and information about
a social-category membership may activate a general stereotype
(e.g., of an Asian, a woman, or a college professor), information
about a new individual’s similarity to one’s signiﬁcant other may
activate the signiﬁcant-other schema (e.g., a schema of one’s
spouse or of a close friend). That schema may then be used to
make further (often inaccurate) inferences about the newly encountered person.
In their program of research, Anderson and her colleagues
have shown that ‘‘people use signiﬁcant-other representations
[to make] representation-consistent inferences about a newly
encountered individual, . . . misremembering him or her in
terms of qualities that he or she does not have, but rather are part
of the signiﬁcant-other representation’’ (Andersen & Berk,
1998, p. 82). In Andersen’s conceptual paradigm, similarity of
the new target to the signiﬁcant other is of critical importance
and has been operationally deﬁned by the proportion of descriptors about the new target contained also in the signiﬁcant
other’s representation. In a typical study of this genre, participants describe a signiﬁcant other, read a description of a person
who does or does not resemble their signiﬁcant other (similarity
condition vs. nonsimilarity condition), and then perform a recognition memory task in which they rate their conﬁdence that
various statements were included in that description of the
target person. The degree of transference is then inferred from
the degree to which participants in the similarity condition
falsely remember statements consistent with the signiﬁcant
other’s description more often than do participants in the nonsimilarity condition (e.g., Andersen, Glassman, Chen, & Cole,
1995).
In research by Andersen and her colleagues, transference is
considered the immediate consequence of activation of the
signiﬁcant-other schema by features of the newly encountered
person. But it is of interest to ask whether the occurrence of
transference is invariable, or whether instead it may depend on
the perceiver’s mental resources. Social-cognitive theory draws
a relevant distinction between schema activation and schema
use (cf. Higgins, 1996). An activated schema may or may not
govern the perceiver’s impressions, depending on whether the
perceiver possesses the necessary cognitive and motivational
resources to go beyond the activated schema and seek further
information pertinent to the requisite judgment (Brewer, 1988;
Fiske & Neuberg, 1990; Kruglanski, Pierro, Mannetti, Erb, &
Chun, 2007; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986).
For instance, persuasion research has shown that the likelihood
of an early ‘‘peripheral cue,’’ or heuristic, affecting attitudes increases when a resource-draining distraction is present (Petty,
Wells, & Brock, 1976), when cognitive load is present, or when
processing motivation is low (Kruglanski et al., 2007; Pierro,
Mannetti, Erb, Spiegel, & Kruglanski, 2005). Social-categorization research has demonstrated that the likelihood of an individual basing impressions on activated race, gender, or age
stereotypes increases if he or she lacks sufﬁcient cognitive and

Volume 19—Number 3

motivational resources to continue processing less readily available individuating information (Bodenhausen, 1990; Brewer,
1988; Fiske & Neuberg, 1990). Thus, if transference is a special
case of schema utilization, it too should be particularly pronounced under conditions in which the individual’s processing
resources are meager. From this perspective, there appears to be
an intriguing contrast between the social-cognitive view of
transference and the prior psychodynamic conceptions. As noted
earlier, the psychodynamic interpretation depicts transference as
an intense, resource-demanding process. To the contrary, our
sociocognitive analysis suggests that transference is more likely
to occur when the individual’s energy resources are low, rather
than abundant.
In the present study, we operationally deﬁned the amount of
resources available to the individual in terms of the individual’s
circadian cycle. It has long been recognized that some people
prefer daytime activity (i.e., may be referred to colloquially as
morning types), whereas others prefer nighttime activity (i.e.,
may be referred to as evening types; Freeman & Hovland, 1934;
Kleitman, 1939; Smith, Reilly, & Midkiff, 1989). Many biological variables show a deﬁnite periodicity within a cycle length
of 24 hr; these cyclical processes, called circadian rhythms,
include body temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, and
hormone levels. Through their effects on processing resources,
circadian rhythms may inﬂuence social perceivers’ propensity to
stereotype other individuals. In a study supporting this hypothesis, Bodenhausen (1990) demonstrated that subjects exhibited stereotypic biases in their judgment to a signiﬁcantly
greater extent at a nonoptimal time of day (i.e., in the morning
for evening types and in the evening for morning types) than
at an optimal time of day (i.e., in the evening for evening types
and in the morning for morning types). In other words, stereotyping was greater when individuals performed the task at the
low point in their circadian cycle, which we refer to as a circadian mismatch, than when they performed the task at the high
point of their circadian cycle, which we refer to as a circadian
match.
The present research extended this logic to transference. We
reasoned that if, essentially, transference reﬂects the misapplication of an activated signiﬁcant-other schema to a newly
encountered individual, and if an activated schema is more
likely to be misapplied in the absence, rather than the presence,
of processing resources, then more pronounced transference
effects should be observed under conditions of circadian mismatch than under conditions of circadian match. To investigate
this possibility, we examined individuals characterized as morning types or evening types both in the morning and in the
evening. Additionally, we manipulated a new target person’s
similarity to a signiﬁcant other’s representation previously furnished by each participant. We hypothesized that participants’
tendency to falsely generalize the representation of their signiﬁcant other to a similar new target would be more pronounced
for morning types tested in the evening rather than the morning,

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

297

Circadian Mismatches and the Transference Effect

and for evening types tested in the morning rather than the
evening.
METHOD

Participants and Design
Participants were 42 (30 female, 12 male) undergraduate students (mean age 5 19 years) currently enrolled in a psychology
course at The University of Rome ‘‘La Sapienza.’’ Following the
procedure devised by Andersen and her colleagues (e.g., Andersen & Cole, 1990), the experiment proceeded in two phases
for which participants received separate credits. During the ﬁrst
phase, participants completed the morningness scale described
in the next section. Then, they carried out a feature-listing task.
In the second phase, which occurred 2 weeks later, participants
performed a learning trial and a recognition memory task. In this
phase, participants were randomly assigned to a 2 (similarity
present vs. similarity absent)  2 (circadian match vs. mismatch) research design.
Phase 1
Assessing Morningness
In the ﬁrst phase of our study, morningness was assessed using
an instrument developed by Smith et al. (1989). This 13-item
composite scale distills the best items from two commonly
known morningness scales, ones developed by Horne and Ostberg (1976) and by Torsvall and Akerstedt (1980). A sample
item is, ‘‘One hears about morning and evening types of people.
Which one of these types do you consider yourself to be?’’ Responses to this question are made on the following scale: 1 5
deﬁnitely an evening type, 2 5 more an evening than a morning
type, 3 5 more a morning than an evening type, 4 5 deﬁnitely a
morning type. A composite morningness score is computed by
summing the participant’s responses to the items. Scores range
from 13 (extreme evening type) to 55 (extreme morning type).
Previous studies (e.g., Guthrie, Ash, & Bendapudi, 1995) reported a reliability of .90 for this particular scale. In the present
sample, reliability of the scale was satisfactory (a 5 .74).
Feature-Listing Task
Participants were asked to name, visualize, and describe a
current or past signiﬁcant other (i.e., a person ‘‘who is very
important to them and has been for many years’’; Anderson &
Cole, 1990, p. 387). In order to do so, they generated a list of 20
descriptor statements (beginning with the prompt, ‘‘Generally,
[name of person] ______________’’; cf. Andersen & Baum,
1994) that uniquely characterized their signiﬁcant other and
distinguished him or her from other people. Participants subsequently rank-ordered the statements in order of importance or
centrality as characterizing that person. They were then asked to
select 12 traits that were either neutral or irrelevant to the
person they visualized (‘‘neutral’’ was deﬁned to imply neither a

298

positive nor a negative valence). These traits were used in Phase
2 as ﬁller items presented along with the target descriptors. After
completing these tasks, participants were thanked for their
participation and asked to sign up for an ostensibly unrelated
study.
Phase 2
Learning Trial and Recognition Memory Task
Participants who showed up to take part in the ‘‘unrelated’’ study
had been previously categorized as morning types or as evening
types on the basis of a median split of the scores on the morningness scale in Phase 1. They were randomly assigned to one of
two conditions: match (i.e., those who participated in Phase 2 at
the high point of their circadian cycle) and mismatch (i.e., those
who participated at the low point of their circadian cycle). Match
participants were deﬁned as morning types at a morning session
(8–9 a.m.) and as evening types at an evening session (7–8 p.m.).
Nonmatch participants were deﬁned as morning types at an
evening session and as evening types at a morning session.
Following their random assignment to the match or mismatch
condition, participants were asked to appear for the study at
designated times corresponding to their condition, and they all
did so.
When participants arrived at the designated session, 2 weeks
following Phase 1, they were randomly assigned to the similar
or the nonsimilar condition. In both conditions, participants
were advised that they would perform a task with another person
and that their interaction would be observed. Participants were
further told that we would ﬁrst give them information characterizing this other person, as we were interested in how having
this information would affect the interaction. They were then
given 3 min to study the information about their future interaction partner. This constituted the learning trial.
In the similar condition, the new individual was described
using eight idiographic signiﬁcant-other descriptors (those
ranked 4–11 in Phase 1; those ranked 1–3 and 12–16 were later
used to measure transference of the signiﬁcant other’s characteristics) and six ﬁller descriptors from the neutral list the participant generated in Phase 1. In the nonsimilar condition, the
new individual was described using descriptors from another
participant randomly selected without replacement.
At that point, participants performed a recognition memory
task in which 15 randomly ordered descriptor sentences were
presented. They were told to indicate how many of these sentences had been included among the previously provided descriptions of the new person. Each descriptor sentence was
evaluated on a scale ranging from 1 (I am conﬁdent that this
descriptor was not presented ) to 4 (I am conﬁdent that this descriptor was presented ). Four of the descriptor sentences had
actually been presented to the participant during the learning
trial (2 signiﬁcant-other descriptors and 2 ﬁller items). Eight of
the 11 remaining descriptors were the signiﬁcant-other de-

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 3

Arie W. Kruglanski and Antonio Pierro

Manipulation Checks
After the recognition memory task, participants indicated how
similar the individual in Phase 2 seemed to the signiﬁcant other
they themselves had described in Phase 1, providing a rating on
a 9-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all similar) to 9 (extremely
similar). Participants also responded to two items intended to
assess their perceived mental capacity at the time during which
they were tested: ‘‘At this time it is difﬁcult for me to carefully
consider my answers to these questions,’’ and ‘‘At this time I feel
mentally fatigued.’’ Responses to these questions were recorded
on 7-point scales ranging from 1 (extremely false) to 7 (extremely
true). These responses were highly intercorrelated, so we computed a composite score for perceived cognitive capacity by
averaging the two responses (a 5 .91). Finally, participants were
thanked and fully debriefed.
RESULTS

Manipulation Check
Perceived Similarity
Results of a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) performed
on participants’ similarity ratings yielded a signiﬁcant effect of
similarity condition, F(1, 40) 5 7.35, p < .01. Perceived resemblance between the future interaction partner and the signiﬁcant other was greater in the similar condition (M 5 5.0) than
in the nonsimilar condition (M 5 3.91). This result indicates
that our manipulation was successful.
Perceived Cognitive Capacity
Results of a one-way ANOVA performed on participants’ ratings
of cognitive capacity yielded a signiﬁcant effect of circadian
matching, F(1, 40) 5 4.23, p < .05, with lower perceived capacity in the mismatch condition (M 5 3.98) than in the match
condition (M 5 3.00). Again, this result attests to the efﬁcacy of
our manipulation.

Volume 19—Number 3

Nonsimilar

Similar

3.0
2.5
False Alarms

scriptors ranked 1 through 3 and 12 through 16 by that participant. These 8 representation-consistent descriptors were used to
determine whether transference occurred and whether the participant went beyond the information actually given about the
target. Three descriptor items from the neutral-irrelevant list
were also included, as ﬁller items.
Following prior transference studies, we computed the false
alarm rate, a measure of recognition memory, as an indicator of
transference. In this paradigm, the false alarm rate is the likelihood of erroneously recognizing the similar (but not presented)
descriptors, and it is operationally deﬁned as the number of
‘‘yes’’ responses to new (i.e., not previously presented) experimental items. The false alarm rate is the primary indicator of
transference of the old mental representation to the new person
(Andersen & Cole, 1990). Higher scores on this index represent
a greater extent of transference.

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
Match
Mismatch
Circadian Matching

Fig. 1. Transference (mean number of false alarms) as a function of
similarity condition and circadian matching.

Transference
A 2 (similarity condition: similar vs. nonsimilar)  2 (circadian
matching: match vs. mismatch) ANOVA performed on the false
alarm rate yielded a signiﬁcant main effect of similarity condition, F(1, 38) 5 4.06, p < .05. This ﬁnding was in the predicted
direction, attesting to a greater degree of transference in the
similar than in the nonsimilar condition, and replicates in an
Italian context the ﬁndings of Andersen and her colleagues (e.g.,
Andersen & Berk, 1998; Andersen & Chen, 2002; Andersen &
Cole, 1990). Of greater importance, the hypothesized two-way
interaction between similarity condition and circadian matching
was signiﬁcant, F(1, 38) 5 9.47, p < .01. The pertinent means
are displayed in Figure 1.
Simple tests on the patterns of the means underlying this interaction corroborated our predictions. In the mismatch condition, the difference between the similar and nonsimilar conditions
was signiﬁcant, F(1, 19) 5 16.63, p < .001, Msimilar 5 2.83,
Mnonsimilar 5 1.81, whereas in the match condition, this difference was nonsigniﬁcant, F(1, 19) 5 0.46, n.s., Msimilar 5 2.04,
Mnonsimilar 5 2.25. These results are consistent with the notion that
transference effects are more pronounced during circadian mismatches than during circadian matches.
To check whether the effects of circadian matching were
similar for morning and evening types, we included the morningness factor in a 2 (similarity condition: similar vs. nonsimilar)
 2 (circadian matching: match vs. mismatch)  2 (morningness: morning vs. evening type) ANOVA. The analysis yielded
no two- or three-way interaction effects involving morningness,
indicating that effects of circadian matching were similar
for morning and evening types. In addition, results of two 2
(similarity condition: similar vs. nonsimilar)  2 (circadian
matching: match vs. mismatch) ANOVAs performed separately
for morning and evening types conﬁrmed that the two-way
interaction between similarity and circadian matching was
similar for morning types, F(1, 14) 5 3.52, p < .08, and evening
types, F(1, 20) 5 4.73, p < .04.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

299

Circadian Mismatches and the Transference Effect

Andersen and Cole (1990) found that false alarm rates varied
as a function of the descriptors’ prototypicality. Thus, we
examined feature prototypicality in our data following the
procedure of Andersen and Cole (1990, p. 395). We classiﬁed
representation-consistent recognition-test items as highly prototypical (ranks 1–3) or moderately prototypical (ranks 12–16)
and included this factor in a 2 (similarity condition: similar vs.
nonsimilar)  2 (circadian matching: match vs. mismatch)  2
(prototypicality: highly vs. moderately prototypical) ANOVA.
The analysis conﬁrmed the signiﬁcant main effect of similarity
condition and the two-way interaction of similarity condition and circadian matching reported earlier. In addition, the
analysis yielded a signiﬁcant main effect of prototypicality,
F(1, 38) 5 4.97, p < .03, with the false alarm rate being more
pronounced for highly prototypical features (M 5 2.36) than for
moderately prototypical features (M 5 2.14), conﬁrming Andersen and Cole’s (1990) results. The analysis also yielded a
two-way interaction of prototypicality and similarity condition,
F(1, 38) 5 5.93, p < .02, with the difference in false alarm rates
between these conditions being more pronounced for highly
prototypical features (Msimilar 5 2.73, Mnonsimilar 5 2.01) than for
moderately prototypical features (Msimilar 5 2.25, Mnonsimilar 5
2.04). Neither the two-way interaction between prototypicality
and matching, F(1, 38) 5 1.47, n.s., nor the three-way interaction of prototypicality, similarity condition, and matching,
F(1, 38) 5 0.08, n.s., was signiﬁcant; thus, the effect of matching
on transference was present for all descriptors.
DISCUSSION

The present results are consistent with the sociocognitive analysis of the transference phenomenon as a special case of schema
utilization. According to this interpretation, social schemata of
various sorts provide relevant information for social judgments.
Some schemata may be quickly activated from memory by salient
cues that may prime them. For instance, cues to an individual’s
age, race, or gender are readily available to a perceiver who
encounters that person; hence, they may activate the corresponding age, race, or gender schemata that provide an initial
basis for social judgments. When the perceiver’s cognitive resources are sparse, he or she may discontinue further search for
information and remain with the initially formed judgment,
treating it as ﬁnal. Such a judgment may be inaccurate when the
initial schema provided misleading information inconsistent
with available individuating evidence that the perceiver failed to
consider.
We extend this analysis to the transference phenomenon,
assuming that it depends on activation of the signiﬁcant other’s
schema by features that a new target appears to share with the
signiﬁcant other. We assume that such schema activation occurs
automatically upon the perceiver’s encounter with the target,
and affords a basis for forming an impression about him or her.
Where perceivers’ resources are limited, they may accept such

300

impressions uncritically and ‘‘freeze’’ upon them (Kruglanski,
2004). As a result, perceivers may exhibit false memory effects
of the kind thought to characterize transference. Our data provide support for this possibility.
Speciﬁcally, we found that individuals exhibit signiﬁcantly
more pronounced transference effects (as indexed by the false
alarm measure) at times of circadian mismatch than at times
of circadian match. We also have evidence that circadian
mismatches produce greater perceived reduction in mental
capability than do circadian matches. This suggests that,
as seems to be the case with schema effects more generally,
transference effects increase when individuals’ mental resources are scarce.
The present ﬁndings deepen current understanding of transference phenomena in two general senses. First, they cast doubt
on the psychodynamic conceptions that emphasized the driven,
energy-intensive nature of transference (e.g., Freud, 1912/1958;
Sullivan, 1953). We found signiﬁcant transference effects only
under limited-resource conditions, that is, during circadian
mismatches. We did not ﬁnd transference effects during circadian matches, when individuals’ mental resources may have
allowed them to examine the available information more critically. Second, our results expand understanding of transference
from a social-cognition perspective. Whereas prior social-cognitive ﬁndings may have suggested the inevitability of transference once the signiﬁcant-other schema has been activated,
the present ﬁndings suggest that the activated schema may or
may not be used, depending on the individual’s processing resources. The application or nonapplication of the schema, in
turn, has implications for the likelihood of transference.
Though the transference effect in the present study disappeared when participants’ cognitive resources were plentiful
(i.e., under circadian-match conditions), this does not imply that
the availability of resources eliminates transference invariably.
Whether or not it does may depend on the individual’s epistemic
motivation. In our study, we assumed that cognitive resources
would be utilized to serve the accuracy motivation. However, resources could also be utilized (and in fact mobilized)
by a motivation that increases the likelihood of freezing on
an automatically activated schema or stereotype, such as the
need for nonspeciﬁc cognitive closure (Kruglanski, 2004). In a
recent set of studies supporting this notion (Pierro, Spina, &
Kruglanski, 2007), we found more pronounced transference
effects among individuals high in dispositional need for closure
than in those low in dispositional need for closure. Conceptually
close to motivational forces assumed to be involved in transference effects by psychoanalytic theorists (Freud, 1912/1958;
Jung, 1968/1975; Sullivan, 1953), needs for various speciﬁc
kinds of closure could also enhance transference effects, much
as they may enhance freezing on alternative activated schemata.
A promising avenue for future research will be to integrate the
psychoanalytic and the social-cognitive approaches to understanding the transference phenomenon.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 3

Arie W. Kruglanski and Antonio Pierro

REFERENCES
Andersen, S.M., & Baum, A. (1994). Transference in interpersonal
relations: Inferences and affect based on signiﬁcant-other representations. Journal of Personality, 62, 460–497.
Andersen, S.M., & Berk, M.S. (1998). Transference in everyday
experience: Implications of experimental research for relevant
clinical phenomena. Review of General Psychology, 2, 81–120.
Andersen, S.M., & Chen, S. (2002). The relational self: An interpersonal social-cognitive theory. Psychological Bulletin, 109, 619–
645.
Andersen, S.M., & Cole, S.W. (1990). ‘‘Do I know you?’’ The role of
signiﬁcant others in general social perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 384–399.
Andersen, S.M., Glassman, N.S., Chen, S., & Cole, S.W. (1995).
Transference in social perception: The role of chronic accessibility in signiﬁcant-other representations. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 69, 41–57.
Bodenhausen, G.V. (1990). Stereotypes as judgmental heuristics: Evidence of circadian variations in discrimination. Psychological
Science, 1, 319–322.
Brewer, M.B. (1988). A dual process model of impression formation. In
T.K. Srull & R.S. Wyer (Eds.), Advances in social cognition (Vol. 1,
pp. 1–36). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ehrenreich, J.H. (1989). Transference: One concept or many? The
Psychoanalytic Review, 76, 37–65.
Fiske, S.T., & Neuberg, S.L. (1990). A continuum model of impression
formation from category-based to individuating processes: Inﬂuences of information and motivation on attention and interpretation. In M.P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 23, pp. 1–74). New York: Academic Press.
Freeman, G., & Hovland, C. (1934). Diurnal variation in performance
and related physiological processes. Psychological Bulletin, 31,
777–799.
Freud, S. (1955). Studies on hysteria. In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The
standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund
Freud (Vol. 2). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published
1895)
Freud, S. (1957). Five lectures on psycho-analysis, Leonardo da Vinci
and other works. In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard
edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud
(Vol. 11). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1910)
Freud, S. (1958). The dynamics of transference. In J. Strachey (Ed. &
Trans.), The standard edition of the complete psychological works
of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 12, pp. 97–108). London: Hogarth Press.
(Original work published 1912)
Freud, S. (1958). Remembering, repeating and working-through (further recommendations on the technique of psycho-analysis II).
In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard edition of the complete
psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 12, pp. 145–156).
London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1914)
Greenberg, J.R., & Mitchell, S.A. (1983). Object relations in psychoanalytic theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Volume 19—Number 3

Guthrie, J.P., Ash, R.A., & Bendapudi, V. (1995). Additional validity
evidence for a measure of morningness. Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 186–190.
Higgins, E.T. (1996). Knowledge activation: Accessibility, applicability, and salience. In E.T. Higgins & A.W. Kruglanski (Eds.),
Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 133–168).
New York: Guilford.
Horne, J., & Ostberg, O. (1976). A self-assessment questionnaire to
determine morningness-eveningness in human circadian rhythms.
International Journal of Chronobiology, 4, 97–110.
Horney, K. (1939). New ways in psychoanalysis. New York: Norton.
Horney, K. (1945). Our inner conﬂict. New York: Norton.
Jung, C.G. (1975). Psicologia analitica. Le conferenze alla Clinica
Tavistock (1935) (S. Chiappori, Trans.). Milano, Italy: Mondadori.
(Original work published 1968)
Kleitman, N. (1939). Sleep and wakefulness. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Kruglanski, A.W. (2004). The psychology of closed mindedness. New
York: Psychology Press.
Kruglanski, A.W., Pierro, A., Mannetti, L., Erb, H.P., & Chun, W.Y.
(2007). On the parameters of human judgement. In M.P. Zanna
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 39, pp.
255–303). New York: Academic Press.
Luborsky, L., & Crits-Christoph, P. (1990). Understanding transference: The core conﬂictual relationship theme method. New York:
Basic Books.
Petty, R.E., & Cacioppo, J.T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model
of persuasion. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental
social psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 123–205). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Petty, R.E., Wells, G.T., & Brock, T.C. (1976). Distraction can enhance
or reduce yielding to propaganda: Thought disruption versus effort justiﬁcation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
34, 874–884.
Pierro, A., Mannetti, L., Erb, H.P., Spiegel, S., & Kruglanski, A.W.
(2005). Informational length and order of presentation as determinants of persuasion. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41, 458–469.
Pierro, A., Spina, I., & Kruglanski, A.W. (2007). ‘‘Seizing and freezing’’
on a signiﬁcant other schema: Need for closure and the transference effect in social judgment. Unpublished manuscript, University of Rome ‘‘La Sapienza.’’
Smith, C., Reilly, C., & Midkiff, K. (1989). Evaluation of three circadian
rhythm questionnaires with suggestions for an improved measure
of morningness. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74, 728–738.
Sullivan, H.S. (1940). Conceptions in modern psychiatry. New York:
Norton.
Sullivan, H.S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York:
Norton.
Torsvall, L., & Akerstedt, T. (1980). A diurnal type scale. Scandinavian Journal of Work and Environmental Health, 6, 283–290.
(RECEIVED 6/18/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 9/8/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

301

