PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Article

It Takes Two
The Interpersonal Nature of Empathic Accuracy
Jamil Zaki, Niall Bolger, and Kevin Ochsner
Columbia University

ABSTRACT—Although

current theories suggest that affective empathy (perceivers’ experience of social targets’
emotions) should contribute to empathic accuracy (perceivers’ ability to accurately assess targets’ emotions),
extant research has failed to consistently demonstrate a
correspondence between them. We reasoned that prior null
ﬁndings may be attributable to a failure to account for the
fundamentally interpersonal nature of empathy, and tested the prediction that empathic accuracy may depend on
both targets’ tendency to express emotion and perceivers’
tendency to empathically share that emotion. Using a
continuous affect-rating paradigm, we found that perceivers’ trait affective empathy was unrelated to empathic
accuracy unless targets’ trait expressivity was taken into
account: Perceivers’ trait affective empathy predicted
accuracy only for expressive targets. These data suggest
that perceivers’self-reported affective empathy can indeed
predict their empathic accuracy, but only when targets’ expressivity allows their thoughts and feelings to be read.

Empathy—the capacity to feel the emotions of other individuals—is so critical to social relationships and prosocial behavior
(Eisenberg & Miller, 1987) that its absence is a hallmark of
psychopathy and sociopathy (Blair, 2005). As a psychological
construct, empathy comprises multiple processes that interact to
produce an empathic response. Although these processes have
been characterized in various ways (e.g., Davis, 1994; Preston &
de Waal, 2002; Wispe, 1986), most theories suggest that empathy consists of both affective and cognitive components.
Affective empathy refers to perceivers’ experience of sharing the
emotions they observe in social targets and is often measured as
a stable trait through self-report questionnaires (e.g., Davis,
1983; Mehrabian & Epstein, 1972). Cognitive empathy is the

Address correspondence to Jamil Zaki or Kevin Ochsner, Department of Psychology, Columbia University, 406 Schermerhorn Hall,
1190 Amsterdam Ave., New York, NY 10027, e-mail: jamil@psych.
columbia.edu or kochsner@psych.columbia.edu.

Volume 19—Number 4

ability of a perceiver to understand the internal states of targets
and is often measured as the accuracy with which a perceiver
can assess the thoughts and feelings a target is experiencing
(empathic accuracy, a term ﬁrst coined by Ickes, Stinson, Bissonnette, & Garcia, 1990).
Surprisingly, work attempting to tie these aspects of empathy
together by using trait measures of perceivers’ affective empathy
to predict their empathic accuracy (i.e., cognitive empathy) has
not revealed a consistent relationship (Hall, 1979; Ickes et al.,
1990; Levenson & Ruef, 1992; but see also Riggio, Tucker, &
Coffaro, 1989). As a result, researchers have largely abandoned
the hunt for ‘‘accurate empathic perceivers’’ (Ickes, 2003, chap.
7; Ickes et al., 2000) and have focused instead on situations and
states that lead to empathic accuracy (Pickett, Gardner, &
Knowles, 2004; Simpson, Orina, & Ickes, 2003; Stinson &
Ickes, 1992). However, the causes of this noncorrespondence
between trait and behavioral measures of empathy have remained mysterious.
This disparity between trait measures of affective empathy
and behavioral measures of empathic accuracy can be explained
in two ways. First, these measures differ in the types of empathy
they tap, and it is possible that affective and cognitive empathy
are not related. Understanding the emotions of other individuals
might be independent of experiencing those emotions—a dissociation seen, for example, in sociopaths (Blair, 2005). However, this explanation seems unlikely given recent work demonstrating strong relationships between experiencing emotions
and recognizing them in other people. For example, braindamaged patients whose experience of disgust or fear is diminished also have difﬁculty perceiving those emotions in others
(Adolphs et al., 2005; Calder, Keane, Manes, Antoun, & Young,
2000). Furthermore, recent studies indicate that similar patterns
of brain and autonomic activation are produced when people
observe the emotions of others and directly experience those
emotions themselves (Decety & Jackson, 2006). Together, these
ﬁndings suggest that perceivers understand targets’ emotions by
experiencing those emotional states themselves and then
translating that shared experience into assessments of how the
targets feel (Gallese, Keysers, & Rizzolatti, 2004; Niedenthal,

Copyright
r 2008 Association
for Psychological
Science
Downloaded
from pss.sagepub.com
at Bobst Library,
New York University
on April 19, 2016

399

Factors in Empathic Accuracy

Barsalou, Ric, & Krauth-Gruber, 2005). These suggestions,
however, have not been conﬁrmed experimentally.
A second possibility is that trait affective empathy and empathic accuracy do not correlate because of a more general
disparity between self-reported trait measures and behavior.
Contemporary models suggest that personality is best understood as an interaction between a person and the situations he or
she encounters (Mischel & Shoda, 1995), such that reported
traits predict behavior, but only if situations contain relevant
psychological ingredients. For example, aggressive people,
when praised, may not display behavior different from that of
nonaggressive people. Instead, situations in which aggressive
individuals are provoked are necessary in order for their traits to
predict their behavior. Such ‘‘if-then’’ relationships form stable
signatures of personality that take both dispositions and situations into account (Shoda, Mischel, & Wright, 1989).
In the study reported here, we applied this logic to an analysis
of the variables predicting empathic accuracy. Because empathy
is a fundamentally interpersonal process, the relevant psychological ingredients of the situation can include the dispositions
and states of both the empathic perceiver and his or her interaction partner, as the qualities of both individuals can inﬂuence
the expression of if-then personality signatures (Zayas, Shoda, &
Ayduk, 2002). Thus, simultaneously assessing both the perceiver and the partner, or target, could shed light on previous
difﬁculties in identifying accurate empathic perceivers by
highlighting the interpersonal conditions under which the perceiver’s traits predict empathic accuracy. More broadly, the results of such an analysis could serve as an exemplar of the way in
which interpersonal variables affect intrapersonal behavioral
signatures.
One situational factor that is potentially important in predicting empathic accuracy is the emotional expressiveness of targets. For example, if targets are highly expressive—that is, if
they tend to behave in accordance with their experienced emotion (Gross & John, 1997)—then perceivers’ trait affective
empathy may improve their empathic accuracy, allowing them to
both experience and insightfully assess targets’ affective states.
However, if targets express little emotion, the type and quality of
the affective signal may leave less for perceivers to share and
decode. Thus, a relationship between perceivers’ trait affective
empathy and behavioral empathic accuracy may exist, but only
if social targets are sufﬁciently expressive.
The present study tested this hypothesis using an empathicaccuracy protocol in which perceivers continuously assessed
the affective states of targets (see Ickes et al., 1990; Levenson &
Ruef, 1992). Our aim was to clarify the relationship between
perceivers’ tendency to experience the emotions of other individuals (as indexed by trait affective empathy) and their empathic accuracy (measured as a performance variable) by taking
into account the emotional expressiveness of social targets.
Unlike most previous studies in this area, this study included
and assessed the traits of many targets as well as many per-

400

ceivers, so we were able to examine differences in empathic
accuracy across multiple perceiver-target combinations. We predicted that greater trait affective empathy would increase
empathic accuracy, but only when targets were high in trait
expressivity.
METHOD

The study had two phases. In the initial target phase, we collected a library of stimulus videos in which social targets discussed emotional events in their lives. The targets then watched
their own videos and made continuous ratings of how positive or
negative they had felt while speaking. In the subsequent perceiver phase, an unrelated group of perceivers watched these
videos and continuously rated how they thought the target was
feeling during each video. Our measure of empathic accuracy
was the correlation between perceivers’ ratings of targets’ feelings and targets’ ratings of their own feelings.
Target Phase
Fourteen participants (the targets; mean age 5 26.5 years; 7
female, 7 male) ﬁrst completed the 10-item Berkeley Expressivity Questionnaire (BEQ; see Gross, 2000), which measures
respondents’ sense of how much their emotional experience is
visible to other people (e.g., ‘‘Whenever I feel positive emotions,
people can easily see exactly what I am feeling’’). The targets
were then videotaped while discussing the four most positive
and four most negative personal events they were comfortable
describing. After discussing each event, targets used 9-point
Likert scales to make summary ratings of the overall valence and
arousal of the emotion they had experienced while talking.
After discussing all eight emotional events, targets watched
the videotapes of themselves talking and used a sliding 9-point
Likert scale (similar to the rating dial used by Levenson & Ruef,
1992) to continuously rate the level of positive or negative affect
they had felt at each moment (1 5 extremely negative, 9 5
extremely positive). After completing the session, targets were
asked for their permission to use their videotapes in the subsequent empathic-accuracy protocol.
A subset of stimulus videos was chosen for use in the second
phase of the study. Three participants’ videos were excluded from
selection because these participants either refused to allow their
videos to be used or showed insufﬁcient variability in their
self-ratings. Of the remaining clips (n 5 88), 40 were chosen
(21 negative, 19 positive), such that positive and negative clips
had comparable means and standard deviations on the summary
ratings of overall arousal.
Perceiver Phase
Forty participants (mean age 5 19.2 years; 18 female, 22 male)
completed the second phase for course credit or $15. Equipment
failure rendered data from 7 participants unusable, leaving

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 4

Jamil Zaki, Niall Bolger, and Kevin Ochsner

a sample of 33 perceivers (mean age 5 18.9 years; 16 female,
17 male).
Perceivers ﬁrst completed the Balanced Emotional Empathy
Scale (BEES; Mehrabian & Epstein, 1972), which taps respondents’ self-perceived affective empathy. Then, each perceiver
viewed 20 stimulus clips (half of the total target set). A pseudorandomized Latin square design ensured that perceivers saw
equal numbers of positive and negative clips, and that each clip
was viewed by approximately the same number of perceivers.
While watching each clip, perceivers continuously rated how
positive or negative they believed the target was feeling, using
the same scale that the targets had employed.
Analyses
Data reduction and time-series correlations were performed
using Matlab 7.1 (Mathworks, 2005). Affect-rating data were
averaged across 5-s periods, and each 5-s mean served as one
point in the subsequent time-series analyses. Data from each
clip were transformed using the Cochrane-Orcutt method to
remove ﬁrst-order autocorrelation (Ostrom, 1990). Targets’ affect ratings were then correlated with perceivers’ affect ratings
of the targets, yielding a separate coefﬁcient, referred to as accuracy, for each perceiver-clip combination. Overall, 660 accuracy scores (33 perceivers  20 clips per perceiver) were used in
the subsequent analyses. All correlation coefﬁcients were r-toZ transformed so that they were normally distributed for the
analyses.
Empathic accuracy was modeled as a function of our predictors using a mixed linear model. To take nonindependence in
the data into account, we treated both targets and perceivers as
random effects. Mixed-model analyses were performed using
SAS 9.1 (SAS Institute, 2002).
RESULTS

p < .005 prep 5 .97). Expressivity had no relationship to the
intensity of affect reported by targets in their summary valence
or arousal ratings (r 5 .11, p > .4, prep 5 .52); thus, the effect of
targets’ expressivity does not simply reﬂect emotional experience becoming stronger as targets’ expressivity increased.
Though less expressive targets were less readable, they were
not completely unreadable by perceivers. Post hoc analyses of
targets in the bottom quartile of expressivity (162 observations)
revealed that their clips still produced moderate accuracy that
was signiﬁcantly higher than chance (mean r 5 .34), t(161) 5
10.47, p < .001, prep > .99, d 5 1.64. Perceivers also correctly
assessed the valence of the bottom quartile’s clips, successfully
differentiating positive from negative clips (mean ratings 5 2.83
for negative clips and 5.64 for positive clips), t(160) 5 10.53,
p < .001, prep > .99, d 5 1.65.
Target-Perceiver Interactions Affecting Accuracy
We next examined whether targets’ expressivity and perceivers’
affective empathy interacted to predict accuracy and found a
signiﬁcant interaction effect (b 5 0.07, p < .02, prep 5 .93):
Greater target expressivity improved the empathic accuracy of
perceivers with high affective empathy more than that of perceivers with low affective empathy. We then generated predicted
slopes for the low and high extremes of this model, and we found
that trait affective empathy had no relationship to empathic
accuracy when targets were least expressive (b 5 0.02, p > .5,
prep 5 .45), but did predict empathic accuracy when targets were
most expressive (b 5 0.14, p < .02, prep 5 .95; see Fig. 1).
DISCUSSION

Although empathy is a topic of great interest to psychological
scientists, the relationship between affective and cognitive as-

Results indicated that, overall, perceivers were moderately accurate at assessing the affect of targets (mean raw r between
targets’ and perceivers’ ratings 5 .47). Accuracy did not differ
depending on the valence of the situation targets described (d 5
0.01, prep 5 .19), and perceivers’ mean accuracy did not vary
signiﬁcantly by gender, t(31) 5 0.50, prep 5 .62, d 5 0.16.
Initial analyses indicated that accuracy scores varied greatly
(from 0.99 to 0.82, SD 5 0.37), which allowed us to examine
how this variance was predicted by both perceiver and target
variables.
Perceiver and Target Effects on Accuracy
We ﬁrst examined whether perceivers’ trait affective empathy or
targets’ expressivity predicted empathic accuracy. Taken alone,
perceivers’ trait affective empathy (BEES score) had no signiﬁcant relationship to empathic accuracy (r 5 .04, p 5 .22, prep 5
.71). In contrast, the expressivity (BEQ score) of targets was
a signiﬁcant predictor of perceivers’ empathic accuracy (r 5 .21,

Volume 19—Number 4

Fig. 1. Empathic accuracy as a function of the perceiver’s trait empathy,
for targets at the upper and lower extremes of emotional expressivity. The
shaded area highlights the range of variation in accuracy due to variation
in targets’ expressivity.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

401

Factors in Empathic Accuracy

pects of empathy has remained unclear. Especially puzzling has
been the unexpected but frequently observed noncorrespondence
between trait measures of affective empathy and performance
measures of cognitive empathy, such as empathic accuracy (Hall,
1979; Ickes et al., 1990, 2000; Levenson & Ruef, 1992).
The present research sheds light on one reason trait empathy
has failed to predict empathic accuracy. Following the interactionist model of Mischel and Shoda (1995), we predicted that
trait affective empathy would demonstrate a relationship with
empathic accuracy, but only under certain interpersonal conditions: speciﬁcally, when the target’s inner experience is translated into expressive behavior. Using a naturalistic method that
calculated empathic accuracy as the time-course correlation
between targets’ self-reported emotions and perceivers’ judgments of those emotions, we obtained evidence consistent with
such a model.
We found that targets’ expressivity generally predicted empathic accuracy, and also interacted with perceivers’ trait empathy in predicting empathic accuracy. Critically, perceivers’
trait affective empathy was unrelated to empathic accuracy
when targets were low in expressivity (as shown by the dashed
line in Fig. 1), but did predict accuracy when targets were highly
expressive (as shown by the solid line). This interaction effect is
not attributable to more expressive targets simply feeling
stronger emotions, as there was no relationship between targets’
expressivity and their self-reported affective experience. Furthermore, low-expressivity targets still produced moderate (and
well-above-chance) levels of accuracy across perceivers, a
ﬁnding that suggests low expressivity does not involve a wholesale lack of affective signal on which perceivers could base their
judgments. Instead, it appears that low-expressivity targets
provide affective signal, albeit not of a type that can be used
more effectively by perceivers high in affective empathy than by
perceivers low in affective empathy.
Perceivers high in affective empathy report sharing the emotions of other individuals, and contemporary theories of empathy
suggest that perceivers translate this shared emotion into an
understanding of targets’ internal states (Decety & Jackson,
2006; Niedenthal et al., 2005). Low- and high-expressivity
targets, when discussing emotional events, could provide affective signals that differ in either quality or type, and such
differences could affect the ability of affectively empathic perceivers to share and understand those signals. It is possible,
for example, that the affective information provided by lowexpressivity targets is not as temporally dynamic as the information provided by high-expressivity targets. If that is true,
empathic perceivers may pick up on subtle shifts in affective
state given off only by expressive targets.
Another possibility is that low- and high-expressivity targets
differ qualitatively in the response channels through which they
convey emotion (i.e., affectively laden language, facial expressions, etc.), and that high-empathy perceivers are especially
attuned to the kinds of information highly expressive individuals

402

convey. Consistent with this notion, previous work suggests that
verbal content may be especially predictive of accuracy in
general (Gesn & Ickes, 1999; Hall & Schmid Mast, 2007).
However, this work has not examined the relationships among
usage of different communicative channels, targets’ expressivity, and perceivers’ empathy. Exploring these relationships
could further clarify the sources of accuracy in different interpersonal settings and remains an important direction for future
research.
Broadly, the current data support the use of an interactionist ifthen approach to predicting interpersonal outcomes, by indicating that empathic accuracy can best be modeled by taking into
account the states and traits of both perceivers and targets. Although this conclusion may seem obvious, it is not apparent in
the majority of prior work. Most studies of empathic accuracy
have focused on one type of variable at a time, emphasizing the
traits or the motivations of perceivers (Pickett et al., 2004;
Simpson, Ickes, & Blackstone, 1995), the traits of targets
(Snodgrass, Hecht, & Ploutz-Snyder, 1998), or the personal relationships between targets and perceivers (Stinson & Ickes,
1992). The current data provide evidence that targets’ and perceivers’ traits should be modeled simultaneously because they
can interact with each other. An interpersonal approach to empathic accuracy dovetails with statistical and theoretical models
of person-perception accuracy as involving unique interactions
between perceivers and targets (e.g., Kenny & Albright, 1987).
Modeling the interpersonal dynamics that predict empathic
accuracy could prove useful to understanding numerous situations
involving inferences about nonstrangers, such as communication between close relationship partners or dyadic interactions
between therapists and clients. Previous work has shown that
both overall accuracy and the sources of information on which it
is based differ depending on whether perceivers are inferring the
thoughts and emotions of close others or of strangers (Stinson &
Ickes, 1992). For example, close friends often discuss topics
about which they have common knowledge or shared opinions,
and this common background renders targets more readable and
heightens perceivers’ accuracy. However, little systematic work
has explored how the dispositions of close others, or variability
in the types of relationships they have, affect accuracy. Future
work should examine how traits such as expressivity and empathy inﬂuence people’s expressive behavior and accuracy when
interacting with close others, as well as strangers.
An interactionist approach to empathic accuracy may also be
important for clinical and personality researchers. Much research in these ﬁelds focuses on the ways that purported traits
(e.g., extraversion, neuroticism) or disorders (e.g., social phobia,
borderline personality disorder, autism) predict perception
or behavior in social situations, but does not closely examine
the effect of interaction partners on the expression of socialcognitive traits. Taking interaction partners and situational qualities into account will allow personality and clinical researchers
to specify the circumstances under which personality variables

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 4

Jamil Zaki, Niall Bolger, and Kevin Ochsner

predict behavior or behavioral deﬁcits. For example, a recent
study demonstrated that subjects with autism spectrum disorder
perform poorly on empathic-accuracy tasks, but that their performance improves to near normal when they infer thoughts and
feelings from a structured interaction (Ponnet, Buysse, Roeyers,
& De Clercq, 2007). Understanding the interpersonal situations
that allow for such improvements will be important to developing a deeper understanding of such disorders and potential
related interventions.
Our methods differed from those used in some previous empathic-accuracy studies (e.g., Ickes et al., 1990; Stinson &
Ickes, 1992), in which perceivers attempted to predict, verbally,
the content of targets’ thoughts and feelings at discrete points in
a videotape. Our accuracy measure instead tapped perceivers’
acuity in assessing ﬂuctuations in targets’ affect over time.
Therefore, we cannot generalize the conclusions of our study to
accuracy for the speciﬁc content of targets’ thoughts and feelings.
Nonetheless, in prior work that has not taken targets’ expressivity
into account, this accuracy measure has shown no signiﬁcant
correlation with trait affective empathy (Levenson & Ruef, 1992),
which supports the idea that the type of empathic accuracy we
assessed ﬁts well with an interpersonal if-then approach.
In conclusion, previous research has shown a surprisingly
weak relationship between perceivers’ trait measures of affective empathy and their empathic accuracy, calling into question
whether trait measures of empathy have value in predicting empathic behavior. The current data suggest that these measures
indeed can predict empathy-related behavior, but that their
predictive power can be revealed only by also taking targets’
expressivity into account and adopting an interpersonal perspective on empathic processes.
Acknowledgments—The authors would like to thank Alison
Levy, Daniel Chazin, and Natalie Berg for assistance in data
collection; Sam Gershman and Jared van Snellenberg for advice
in writing analysis scripts; Ethan Kross for helpful comments on
the manuscript; and National Institute on Drug Abuse Grant
DA022541 (to K.O.) for ﬁnancial support of this work.
REFERENCES
Adolphs, R., Gosselin, F., Buchanan, T.W., Tranel, D., Schyns, P., &
Damasio, A.R. (2005). A mechanism for impaired fear recognition after amygdala damage. Nature, 433, 68–72.
Blair, R.J. (2005). Responding to the emotions of others: Dissociating
forms of empathy through the study of typical and psychiatric
populations. Consciousness and Cognition, 14, 698–718.
Calder, A.J., Keane, J., Manes, F., Antoun, N., & Young, A.W. (2000).
Impaired recognition and experience of disgust following brain
injury. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 1077–1078.
Davis, M. (1983). Measuring individual differences in empathy: Evidence for a multidimensional approach. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 44, 113–126.

Volume 19—Number 4

Davis, M. (1994). Empathy: A social psychological approach. Madison,
WI: Brown & Benchmark.
Decety, J., & Jackson, P.L. (2006). A social neuroscience perspective on
empathy. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15, 54–58.
Eisenberg, N., & Miller, P.A. (1987). The relation of empathy to prosocial and related behaviors. Psychological Bulletin, 101, 91–
119.
Gallese, V., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004). A unifying view of the
basis of social cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 396–
403.
Gesn, P., & Ickes, W. (1999). The development of meaning and contexts for empathic accuracy: Channel and sequence effects.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 746–761.
Gross, J. (2000). The Berkeley Expressivity Questionnaire. In J.
Maltby, C.A. Lewis, & A. Hill (Eds.), Commissioned reviews on
300 psychological tests (pp. 465–467). Lampeter, Wales: Edwin
Mellen Press.
Gross, J., & John, O.P. (1997). Revealing feelings: Facets of emotional
expressivity in self-reports, peer ratings, and behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 435–448.
Hall, J.A. (1979). Gender, gender roles, and nonverbal communication
skills. In R. Rosenthal (Ed.), Skills in nonverbal communication
(pp. 32–67). Cambridge, MA: Oelgeschlager, Gunn, & Hain.
Hall, J.A., & Schmid Mast, M. (2007). Sources of accuracy in the
empathic accuracy paradigm. Emotion, 7, 438–446.
Ickes, W. (2003). Everyday mind reading. New York: Perseus Press.
Ickes, W., Buysse, A., Pham, H., Rivers, K., Erickson, J., Hancock, M.,
et al. (2000). On the difﬁculty of distinguishing ‘‘good’’ and
‘‘poor’’ perceivers: A social relations analysis of empathic accuracy data. Personal Relationships, 7, 219–234.
Ickes, W., Stinson, L., Bissonnette, V., & Garcia, S. (1990). Naturalistic
social cognition: Empathic accuracy in mixed-sex dyads. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 730–742.
Kenny, D.A., & Albright, L. (1987). Accuracy in interpersonal perception: A social relations analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 102,
390–402.
Levenson, R.W., & Ruef, A.M. (1992). Empathy: A physiological substrate. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 234–
246.
Mathworks. (2005). Matlab user’s guide. Natick, MA: Author.
Mehrabian, A., & Epstein, N. (1972). A measure of emotional empathy.
Journal of Personality, 40, 525–543.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system theory of
personality: Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality structure. Psychological
Review, 102, 246–268.
Niedenthal, P., Barsalou, L.W., Ric, F., & Krauth-Gruber, S. (2005).
Embodiment in the acquisition and use of emotion knowledge. In
L.F. Barrett, P. Niedenthal, & P. Winkielman (Eds.), Emotion and
consciousness (pp. 21–50). New York: Guilford Press.
Ostrom, C. (1990). Time series analysis: Regression techniques. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pickett, C.L., Gardner, W.L., & Knowles, M. (2004). Getting a cue: The
need to belong and enhanced sensitivity to social cues. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1095–1107.
Ponnet, K., Buysse, A., Roeyers, H., & De Clercq, A. (in press). Mindreading in young adults with ASD: Does structure matter? Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders.
Preston, S.D., & de Waal, F.B. (2002). Empathy: Its ultimate and
proximate bases [Target article and commentaries]. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 25, 1–71.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

403

Factors in Empathic Accuracy

Riggio, R., Tucker, J., & Coffaro, D. (1989). Social skills and empathy.
Personality and Individual Differences, 10, 93–99.
SAS Institute. (2002). SAS 9.1.3 help and documentation. Cary, NC:
Author.
Shoda, Y., Mischel, W., & Wright, J.C. (1989). Intuitive interactionism
in person perception: Effects of situation-behavior relations on
dispositional judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 41–53.
Simpson, J.A., Ickes, W., & Blackstone, T. (1995). When the head
protects the heart: Empathic accuracy in dating relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 629–641.
Simpson, J.A., Orina, M.M., & Ickes, W. (2003). When accuracy hurts,
and when it helps: A test of the empathic accuracy model in
marital interactions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 881–893.

404

Snodgrass, S.E., Hecht, M.A., & Ploutz-Snyder, R. (1998). Interpersonal sensitivity: Expressivity or perceptivity? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 238–249.
Stinson, L., & Ickes, W. (1992). Empathic accuracy in the interactions
of male friends versus male strangers. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 62, 787–797.
Wispe, L. (1986). The distinction between sympathy and empathy: To
call forth a concept, a word is needed. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 50, 314–321.
Zayas, V., Shoda, Y., & Ayduk, O.N. (2002). Personality in context: An
interpersonal systems perspective. Journal of Personality, 70,
851–900.

(RECEIVED 7/2/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 10/2/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 4

