ARTICLE IN PRESS
Journal of Memory and Language xxx (2008) xxx–xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?
James S. Nairne *, Josefa N.S. Pandeirada
Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, 703 Third Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 2 April 2008
revision received 5 June 2008
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Evolution
Memory
Survival
Recall

a b s t r a c t
Do the operating characteristics of memory continue to bear the imprints of ancestral
selection pressures? Previous work in our laboratory has shown that human memory
may be specially tuned to retain information processed in terms of its survival relevance.
A few seconds of survival processing in an incidental learning context can produce recall
levels greater than most, if not all, known encoding procedures. The current experiments
further establish the power of survival processing by demonstrating survival processing
advantages against an encoding procedure requiring a combination of individual-item
and relational processing. Participants were asked to make either survival relevance decisions or pleasantness ratings about words in the same categorized list. Survival processing
produced the best recall, despite the fact that pleasantness ratings of words in a categorized list has long been considered a ‘‘gold standard” for enhancing free recall. The results
also help to rule out conventional interpretations of the survival advantage that appeal to
enhanced relational or categorical processing.
Ó 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
The capacity to remember, to recover the past in anticipation of the future, almost certainly evolved (Darwin,
1859). Nature shaped the characteristics of our memory
systems, primarily through natural selection, because ﬁtness advantages accrued as a consequence of memory’s
operation (see Klein, Cosmides, Tooby, & Chance, 2002;
Tooby & Cosmides, 1992). Yet, to what extent do the operating characteristics of memory continue to bear the imprint of ancestral selection pressures? Are our memory
systems ‘‘tuned” to achieve speciﬁc ends, particularly those
related to survival and reproduction? Or, did memory
evolve as an all-purpose machine, deﬁned more by its ﬂexibility than by its inherent constraints?
Our laboratory has maintained that human memory
likely does contain functional specialization (see Barrett
& Kurzban, 2006). More speciﬁcally, we have suggested
that memory is biased or tuned to remember ﬁtness-relevant information (Nairne & Pandeirada, 2008; Nairne,
Thompson, & Pandeirada, 2007). It is unlikely that mem* Corresponding author. Fax: +1 765 496 1264.
E-mail address: nairne@psych.purdue.edu (J.S. Nairne).

ory evolved to be domain-general, or insensitive to content, because not all events are equally important to
remember. For example, it is usually more important to
remember the location of a food source, or a predator,
than it is to remember random events. This is not to suggest that our brains come pre-equipped with contentspeciﬁc knowledge (e.g., edible versus inedible plants),
but rather that ﬁtness-relevant encodings are remembered particularly well.
In support of this proposal, Nairne et al. (2007) found
that memory was signiﬁcantly enhanced relative to traditional deep processing controls (Craik & Lockhart, 1972)
when random words were processed in terms of their relevance to a survival scenario. Participants were asked to
imagine themselves stranded in the grasslands of a foreign
land, without any basic survival materials, and to rate the
relevance of words to ﬁnding steady supplies of food and
water and protection from predators. Surprise free recall
tests revealed an advantage for survival processing over a
pleasantness rating task, typically considered to be one of
the best deep encoding procedures (e.g., Packman & Battig,
1978), as well as over an alternative schematic control
(moving to a foreign land) and to a condition requiring
self-referential processing. More recently, we compared

0749-596X/$ - see front matter Ó 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

Please cite this article in press as: Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J.N.S., Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?, Journal
of Memory and Language (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

ARTICLE IN PRESS
2

J.S. Nairne, J.N.S. Pandeirada / Journal of Memory and Language xxx (2008) xxx–xxx

survival processing to a host of deep processing controls—
including forming a visual image, generation, and intentional learning—and survival processing produced the best
recall (Nairne, Pandeirada, & Thompson, 2008).
Mnemonic advantages for survival processing have now
been demonstrated in other laboratories as well using
alternative control scenarios (Kang, McDermott, & Cohen,
in press; Weinstein, Bugg, & Roediger, 2008). For example,
survival processing produced better memory than a control scenario involving the planning and execution of a
bank heist (Kang et al., in press).The bank heist scenario
was chosen to match the novelty and potential excitement
of the survival scenario, something that may have been
lacking in the moving control scenario used by Nairne
et al. (2007). Our laboratory has also found survival advantages compared to scenarios in which (a) people were
asked to imagine themselves vacationing at a fancy resort
with all of their needs taken care of, (b) eating dinner at a
restaurant, and (c) planning a charity event with animals at
the local zoo (Nairne & Pandeirada, 2007; Nairne et al.,
2007; Nairne et al., 2008). At this point, we believe, appealing simply to the schema-like properties of the survival
scenario, or to its coherence or novelty, is unlikely to explain these advantages.
Instead, these experiments support the hypothesis that
it is the ﬁtness-relevance of the processing that is important to memory. Information encoded as a consequence
of ﬁtness-based processing is especially accessible and
memorable—more memorable, in fact, than that produced
by most (if not all) known encoding procedures, at least
when free recall is used as the retention measure. At the
same time, these experiments have revealed very little
about the proximate mechanisms that actually produce
the survival beneﬁt. Is survival processing special, arising
from the action of some kind of special mnemonic adaptation, or can we explain the advantage using traditional
explanatory tools? For example, one might claim that survival processing is simply another form of ‘‘deep processing”, albeit a particularly good one, leading to enhanced
elaboration or distinctive encodings (see Hunt & Worthen,
2006).
Another possibility is that rating words for survival
mimics a categorization task. Perhaps participants essentially encode the rated words into an ‘‘ad hoc” category
representing ‘‘things that are relevant in a survival situation.” Once primed by the rating task, the category structure could support an accessible and efﬁcient retrieval
plan (Tulving & Pearlstone, 1966). Put more generally,
one can conceive of the survival rating task as inducing a
form of relational processing. As people rate the items,
they process ostensibly unrelated words along a common
dimension of similarity—relevance to a survival context.
It is well-established that relational processing of unrelated items leads to improved free recall, partly because
the encoded dimension of similarity helps to restrict the
set of possible recallable items at the point of test (Hunt
& McDaniel, 1993; Nairne, 2006). Note this is a completely
conventional account of the survival advantage: Survival
ratings induce people to encode target items into a categorical structure that is particularly accessible during
retrieval.

Such an account generates an obvious prediction: If the
to-be-rated words are inherently related (e.g., if the list is
categorized) then any relational processing induced by
the survival rating task should be less useful to retention
(see Burns, 2006; Mulligan, 2006). A number of studies
have found that relational processing of items in a related
list, such as sorting items from an obviously categorized
list into categories, produces no particular mnemonic
advantages, at least when compared to identical processing of words in an unrelated list (e.g., Burns, 1993; Einstein
& Hunt, 1980; Hunt & Einstein, 1981). The category structure inherent in the list affords a sufﬁcient retrieval ‘‘plan”
for use in recall (e.g., the list contained pieces of furniture,
weapons, and so on) so further relational processing is
redundant (although see Engelkamp, Biegelmann, &
McDaniel, 1998). In fact, encoding procedures that draw
attention to the unique characteristics of the to-be-recalled
items (such as rating items for pleasantness or familiarity)
promote the best recall when lists are categorized. The list
structure enables one to restrict the target search set effectively, and the individual-item processing helps one discriminate items within the search set that did or did not
actually occur on the memory list (see Nairne, 2006).
Researchers have been able to explain a variety of mnemonic phenomena by appealing to trade-offs between
item-speciﬁc and relational processing (e.g., Hunt & Seta,
1984; Klein, Kihlstrom, Loftus, & Aseron, 1989; Klein &
Loftus, 1988; Mulligan, 1999; Mulligan, 2001); it is
certainly possible that similar logic can be used to explain
the advantages seen after survival processing.
The current experiments were designed to test these
ideas, as well as to compare the mnemonic value of survival processing against yet another powerful encoding
procedure: Individual item processing of words presented
in a categorized list. In all three experiments, participants
were asked to make rating decisions about words in a categorized list prior to a surprise free recall test. Experiment
1 used a between-subject design to compare the effects of
survival processing to a prototypical individual-item processing task—rating items for pleasantness. Experiment 2
replicated the results of Experiment 1 using a within-subject design. Finally, in Experiment 3 a non-ﬁtness-relevant
scenario, vacationing at a fancy resort in a foreign land,
was used instead of the survival scenario.
Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants were required to make
survival relevance decisions about items in an obviously
categorized list. To enhance the salience of the category
structure, we blocked the category items during presentation and used categories that seemed inherently survivalrelated (animals, fruits, vegetables, and human dwellings).
In a separate control condition, participants were asked to
make pleasantness ratings about exactly the same items
prior to the surprise recall test. Again, individual-item processing of items in a categorized list is generally thought to
be the best procedure for maximizing free recall (Hunt &
McDaniel, 1993). If survival processing simply induces a
form of relational processing—e.g., ﬁtting words into an
ad hoc category of survival relevance—then we would

Please cite this article in press as: Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J.N.S., Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?, Journal
of Memory and Language (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.S. Nairne, J.N.S. Pandeirada / Journal of Memory and Language xxx (2008) xxx–xxx

expect the typical survival advantage to disappear or even
reverse in the current experiment.
Method
Participants and apparatus
Eighty Purdue undergraduates participated in exchange
for partial credit in an introductory psychology course. Participants were tested individually in sessions lasting
approximately 30 min. Stimuli were presented and controlled by personal computers.
Materials and design
Stimulus materials were drawn from the updated Battig
and Montigue norms (Van Overschelde, Rawson, &
Dunlosky, 2004) and consisted of eight exemplars from
four unique categories: Four-footed animals, fruits, vegetables, and a type of human dwelling. The 32 words were
presented blocked by category (e.g., all eight animals were
presented together) but exemplar order within each category was randomly determined. Four different orders of
category presentation were created to ensure that each
category occurred equally often in each list quartile across
participants. Order of exemplar presentation within each
category was the same in all versions. Two items from an
additional two categories (a natural earth formation; an
article of clothing) were selected to use as practice items.
A simple between-subject design was used: Participants in each group were asked to rate the same words,
presented in the same random orderings, in one of the
two rating scenarios (N = 40 in each group). The rating task
was followed immediately by a short digit recall task prior
to a ﬁnal unexpected free recall task. Except for the rating
scenario, all aspects of the design, including timing, were
held constant across participants.
Procedure
On arrival in the laboratory, participants were randomly
assigned to one of the two rating scenarios with the following instructions:
Survival. In this task we would like you to imagine that
you are stranded in the grasslands of a foreign land, without any basic survival materials. Over the next few months,
you’ll need to ﬁnd steady supplies of food and water and
protect yourself from predators. We are going to show
you a list of words, and we would like you to rate how relevant each of these words would be for you in this survival
situation. Some of the words may be relevant and others
may not—it’s up to you to decide.
Pleasantness. In this task, we are going to show you a list
of words, and we would like you to rate the pleasantness of
each word. Some of the words may be pleasant and others
may not—it’s up to you to decide.
Stimuli were presented individually, centered on the
screen, for ﬁve s apiece and participants were asked to rate
the words on a ﬁve-point scale, with one indicating totally
irrelevant (unpleasant) and ﬁve signifying extremely relevant (pleasant). The rating responses, one through ﬁve,
were displayed just below the presented stimulus and participants responded by selecting the button that corresponded to the rating of their choice. Everyone was

3

cautioned to respond within the ﬁve s presentation window and no mention was made of a later retention test.
A short practice session, containing four to-be-rated words,
preceded the actual rating task.
After the last word was rated, instructions appeared for
the digit recall task. For this task, seven digits, ranging between zero and nine, were presented sequentially for one s
apiece and participants were required to recall the digits in
order by typing responses into a text box. The digit recall
task proceeded for approximately two min. Recall instructions then appeared. Participants were instructed to write
down the earlier-rated words, in any order, on a response
sheet. The ﬁnal recall phase proceeded for 10 min and participants were asked to draw a line on the recall sheet, under the last recalled word, after each min of recall. A clock
was displayed on the computer monitor and a ‘‘beep”
sounded every min signaling the participants to draw the
line.
Results and discussion
Cumulative recall functions for the survival and pleasantness groups are shown in Fig. 1. During the ﬁrst two
mins of recall the groups performed similarly, but a reliable survival advantage emerged by the ﬁve min mark
[F(1, 78) = 5.207, MSE = 12.10, p < .03]. During the second
half of the recall period, on average, very few additional
items were recalled (survival = 1.6; pleasantness = 1.8); a
separate analysis on the number of item gains between ﬁve
and 10 mins revealed no signiﬁcant difference between
groups [F(1, 78) < 1.0]. Overall, for the entire 10 min recall
period, a survival advantage was present (survival = .67;
pleasantness = .62) but only marginally signiﬁcant using a
two-tailed test [F(1, 78) = 3.70, MSE = .012, p < .06].1
The top half of Table 1 presents category clustering data
for recall using the adjusted ratio of clustering, or ARC
score (Roenker, Thompson, & Brown, 1971). The ARC score
measures the extent to which members of the same category tend to be recalled together and is often used as a
measure of relational processing (see Burns, 2006). An
ARC score of 1.00 indicates perfect clustering and a score
of zero indicates chance-level clustering. As expected, the
ARC scores were well above zero, but no signiﬁcant differences were found between the survival and pleasantness
conditions [F(1, 78) = 1.87, MSE = .04. p > .10].
Table 1 reports intrusion data as well, or the extent to
which participants recalled items that were not on the list.
The mean number of intrusions was low for both groups,
but signiﬁcantly more intrusions occurred in the survival
group [F(1, 78) = 15.31, MSE = 1.51, p < .001]. Thus,

1
The fact that the survival advantage was highly signiﬁcant after ﬁvemins and only marginally signiﬁcant after 10 mins might have been due, in
part, to the fact that participants tended to recall slightly more new items
in the pleasantness condition during the second half of the recall period.
Such a pattern may signify relatively more individual-item processing in
the pleasantness condition because steady increases in the recovery of new
items (item gains) can be one hallmark of individual-item processing.
However, the difference in item gains was not statistically signiﬁcant
between groups and assumptions about individual-item processing and
item gains may depend importantly on whether list items are related (see
Burns, 1993).

Please cite this article in press as: Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J.N.S., Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?, Journal
of Memory and Language (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

ARTICLE IN PRESS
4

J.S. Nairne, J.N.S. Pandeirada / Journal of Memory and Language xxx (2008) xxx–xxx

25

Number of Words

20

15

10

Survival
Pleasantness

5

0
min 0 min1

m in 2

min 3

min 4 min 5

min 6 m in 7

min 8

min 9 m in 10

Fig. 1. Cumulative recall curve for each condition.

Table 1
Averages and standard deviation of the ARC scores, number of intrusions,
rating and response time
Survival

Clustering
Intrusions
Rating
Response time (ms)

Pleasantness

M

SD

M

SD

0.47
1.58
3.21
2274.4

0.21
1.45
0.48
449.4

0.53
0.50
3.07
2154.4

0.18
0.961
0.44
307.4

although there is no evidence for differential relational
processing between the groups, it is possible that survival
processing effectively lowered the threshold for response
output (for unknown reasons). In a follow-up analysis we
examined performance exclusively for participants who
failed to commit an intrusion. A survival advantage was
still detected in overall proportion correct recall (Survival = 0.69; Pleasantness = 0.63), but the difference was
signiﬁcant only in a one-tailed t-test [t(56) = 1.87].
The bottom half of Table 1 shows the mean rating and
response time data for each group. The average rating
was slightly higher when items were processed for survival
relevance, but the difference did not approach statistical
signiﬁcance [F(1, 78) = 1.67, MSE = .21]. Similarly, people
took slightly longer to decide about survival relevance,
compared to a pleasantness decision, but the difference
once again was not statistically signiﬁcant [F(1, 78) = 1.94,
MSE = 148230.8]. Previous work in our laboratory has
shown that neither average ratings nor response times
are capable of explaining survival processing advantages
in recall (e.g., Nairne et al., 2007); a similar conclusion
seems appropriate here.
Overall, then, the results of Experiment 1 provide another demonstration of the power of ﬁtness-relevant processing. Processing items for their survival relevance
produced better retention than a standard deep processing
control (rating items for pleasantness). More importantly,
the present control condition—individual item processing
in a categorized list—is thought generally to maximize free
recall because it affords both relational and distinctive
information to encoding (Hunt & McDaniel, 1993). Previous work in our laboratory has shown that a few seconds
of survival processing produces recall levels that exceed

the ‘‘best of the best” of the known encoding procedures,
including the formation of a visual image, generation,
and intentional learning (Nairne et al., 2008). Our conclusion, that survival processing is one of the best—if not
the best—encoding procedures yet identiﬁed in human
memory research, receives further support from the present experiment.
The results of Experiment 1 also help to rule out one
possible interpretation of the survival advantage. As discussed earlier, processing items for their survival relevance
may induce a form of relational processing. When unrelated items are processed in terms of a common theme
(survival relevance), it is conceivable that participants encode similarities among the items, or ﬁt the items into an
accessible category structure. In the present case, the list
possessed a salient category structure, and the categories
were selected to be survival-relevant, so further relational
processing should have been redundant and of little additional use in recall. A survival advantage was still obtained,
and the measure of category clustering suggested equivalent amounts of relational processing across the groups.
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to replicate the results of
Experiment 1 using a within-subject design. Once again,
participants received a list of blocked category items, but
on a random half of the trials they were required to make
either a pleasantness or a survival rating. Within each category half of the items were rated for survival and the
other half for pleasantness. The rating task was followed
by a surprise free recall test for the rated items.
The use of a within-subject design in this context is
important for two reasons. First, because people are making both survival and pleasantness decisions about items
in exactly the same categories, any enhancing effect that
either form of processing might have on category accessibility should beneﬁt items equally in both conditions. Second, the intrusion data in Experiment 1 suggested that
survival processing may have lowered the response output
threshold relative to the pleasantness condition. In the
present experiment, because of the within-subject design,
any such tendency would be expected to affect the recall
of items in both the survival and pleasantness conditions.

Please cite this article in press as: Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J.N.S., Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?, Journal
of Memory and Language (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

ARTICLE IN PRESS
5

J.S. Nairne, J.N.S. Pandeirada / Journal of Memory and Language xxx (2008) xxx–xxx

Method

Materials and design
As in Experiment 1, stimulus materials were
drawn from the updated Battig and Montigue norms
(Van Overschelde et al., 2004) and consisted of eight
exemplars from four unique survival-relevant categories:
Four-footed animals, weather phenomenon, vegetables,
and a type of human dwelling. The 32 words were
presented blocked by category and exemplar order within
each category was randomly determined. Four different
orders of category presentation were created to ensure
that each category occurred equally often in each list
quartile across participants. Order of exemplar presentation within each category was the same in all versions.
Two additional words from each category were selected
to be used as practice items.
A within-subject design was employed: For a random
half of the items in each blocked category, participants
were instructed to make either a survival or a pleasantness
rating decision. Task order was also counterbalanced
across participants to ensure that each word was rated
equally often for survival and pleasantness.
Procedure
On arrival in the laboratory, participants were told they
would be asked to rate words in two ways. For some words
they would provide a pleasantness rating; for other words,
they would rate the word’s relevance to a survival situation. General rating instructions were provided and were
identical to those used in Experiment 1. A short practice
session preceded the main rating session.
Stimuli were presented individually for ﬁve s in the center of the screen. Above each word a question was presented specifying the rating decision for that word (‘‘How
PLEASANT is this word?”, or ‘‘How relevant is this word
to the SURVIVAL situation?”). Below each word, the rating
scale was presented (ranging from one to ﬁve) along with
the relevant labels. Participants responded by selecting
the button that corresponded to the rating of their choice.
The rating tasks were distributed randomly with the constraint that no more than two words were rated on the
same dimension in a row. After the rating session, a short
distractor task preceded initiation of the surprise free recall test. Both the distractor and recall task were the same
as presented in Experiment 1.
Results and discussion
The data of main interest are presented in Fig. 2, which
shows proportion correct recall for words rated for survival
and pleasantness. Replicating Experiment 1, recall in the
survival condition was higher than in the pleasantness
condition [F(1, 31) = 4.48, MSE = 5.58, p < .05]. Out of the

0.70

Proportion Correct Recall

Participants and apparatus
Thirty-two Purdue undergraduates participated in exchange for partial credit in an introductory psychology
course. Participants were tested individually in sessions
lasting approximately 30 min. Stimuli were presented
and controlled by personal computers.

0.60

0.50

0.40

Survival

Pleasantness

Fig. 2. Average proportion of recall for each condition. Error bars
represent 95% conﬁdence intervals (as per Masson & Loftus, 2003).

32 participants, 22 recalled more survival items, nine recalled more items rated for pleasantness, and there was
one tie. Because of the within-subject design, with both
conditions represented equally in all categories, neither
the ARC scores nor the overall intrusion rates are
presented.
In Experiment 1, mean relevance ratings and response
times favored the survival task, but neither was signiﬁcant
in the statistical analyses. In Experiment 2, however, the
mean relevance ratings for survival were signiﬁcantly
higher than the ratings for pleasantness (3.6 vs. 2.8;
F(1, 31) = 45.2, MSE = .23); survival ratings also took significantly longer to complete (2950.3 vs. 2805.3;
F(1, 31) = 4.33, MSE = 77754.1). Thus, it is conceivable that
the survival recall advantage in Experiment 2 is partly
attributable to either a congruity effect (i.e., recall is a positive function of the match between the encoding context
and the item; Schulman, 1974), or to the fact that survival
relevance decisions are more effortful. We think both of
these interpretations are unlikely, based on previous work
showing strong survival recall advantages without corresponding differences in average ratings or response times
(see Experiment 1; also, Nairne et al., 2007).
However, as a further check we performed several additional item-based analyses. First, we calculated the recall
and rating data for each item when it was processed for
survival or pleasantness. We then looked at the correlation
between recall and rating, which was nonsigniﬁcant in
both cases (Pearson r for survival was 0.19; r for pleasantness was 0.28). Next, we correlated the size of the survival
effect (the difference in recall when the item was rated for
survival versus pleasantness) with the size of the rating
difference (the difference in rating when the word was
rated for survival versus pleasantness); this correlation
was small and nonsigniﬁcant (Pearson r = .09). We also
performed a median split on the rating differences and
looked at the size of the survival effect only for those items
that were in the lower half (i.e., those items showing small
or no survival rating advantages). For these 16 items, the

Please cite this article in press as: Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J.N.S., Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?, Journal
of Memory and Language (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

ARTICLE IN PRESS
6

J.S. Nairne, J.N.S. Pandeirada / Journal of Memory and Language xxx (2008) xxx–xxx

average rating difference between survival and pleasantness was a nonsigniﬁcant 0.20 (Survival = 3.4; Pleasantness = 3.2), yet the overall survival advantage remained
in recall (Survival = .66; Pleasantness = .55; t(15) = 2.80,
p < .02).
We performed the same item analyses for the response
times. Again, there was a nonsigniﬁcant correlation between the task-based response times and the survival effect in recall (Pearson r = .23). We also once again
looked at the 16 items that showed the smallest (or no)
survival response time advantages. For these items, average response times were actually longer for the pleasantness task (Survival = 2738.9; Pleasantness = 2932.0), yet
the survival advantage remained in recall (Survival = .73;
Pleasantness = .61; t(15) = 2.58, p < .03). Consequently, as
in our earlier reports, differences in average ratings or response times cannot fully explain the survival advantages
seen in free recall (Nairne et al., 2007).
With respect to free recall, the results of Experiment 2
replicate those of Experiment 1. A reliable survival advantage was obtained, even though the target list was categorized and the control condition was designed to engage a
combination of individual item and relational processing.
The list structure should have minimized any mnemonic
effect of relational processing, yet a survival advantage still
emerged. The survival beneﬁt is even more convincing in
Experiment 2 because a within-subject design was employed. To the extent that survival processing simply increased accessibility of the list categories, or lowered the
response output threshold, then related performance effects should have occurred for both survival and pleasantness items.

dimension is the ﬁtness-relevance of the processing, then
we anticipate the more traditional result—the best recall
for a condition requiring individual-item processing in a
categorized list.
Method
Participants and apparatus
Thirty-two Purdue undergraduates participated in exchange for partial credit in an introductory psychology
course. Participants were tested individually in sessions
lasting approximately 30 min. Stimuli were presented
and controlled by personal computers.
Materials and design
The materials and design employed in Experiment 2
were used in Experiment 3, with the exception that the
vacation scenario was substituted for the survival scenario.
Procedure
All aspects of the procedure mimicked those of Experiment 2 except for the use of the following vacation
scenario:
Vacation. In this task, we would like you to imagine that
you are enjoying an extended vacation at a fancy resort in
the grasslands of a foreign land. All your basic needs are taken care of but, over the next few months, you’ll want to
investigate your surroundings and ﬁnd different activities
to pass the time and maximize your enjoyment. We are
going to show you a list of words, and we would like you
to rate how relevant each of these words would be for
you in this vacation situation. Some of the words may be
relevant and others may not—it’s up to you to decide.

Experiment 3
Results and discussion
The ﬁnal free recall results are shown in Fig. 3, presented as a function of encoding condition. An ANOVA re-

0. 70

Proportion Correct Recall

In the existing literature, it is extremely difﬁcult to ﬁnd
examples of encoding procedures that produce superior
free recall to a condition requiring pleasantness ratings in
a categorized list. The results of the ﬁrst two experiments,
as a consequence, strongly establish the power of ﬁtnessrelevant processing compared to traditional encoding
tasks. Yet, the survival rating procedure used in our experiments is unusual in the sense that processing occurs within the context of a relatively rich and cohesive cover
scenario (survival in the grasslands of a foreign land).
Although we have compared the survival scenario to other
control scenarios, such as moving to a foreign land, it is
possible that any schema-based encoding produces better
recall than individual-item processing in a categorized list.
Experiment 3 was designed to examine this possibility.
Experiment 3 was an exact replication of Experiment 2,
except that the survival scenario was replaced with a conceptually rich, but non-ﬁtness-relevant, alternative scenario. Participants were asked to rate the relevance of
words to a vacation scenario (see also Nairne et al.,
2008). If schema-based processing of words in a categorized list is sufﬁcient to induce superior retention, then
we expect to replicate the pattern seen in Experiment 2—
a recall advantage for the scenario condition over the
pleasantness condition. On the other hand, if the important

0. 60

0. 50

0. 40

Vacation

Pleasantness

Fig. 3. Average proportion of recall for each condition. Error bars
represent 95% conﬁdence intervals (as per Masson and Loftus, 2003).

Please cite this article in press as: Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J.N.S., Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?, Journal
of Memory and Language (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.S. Nairne, J.N.S. Pandeirada / Journal of Memory and Language xxx (2008) xxx–xxx

vealed a signiﬁcant effect of condition [F(1, 31) = 4.25,
MSE = .02, p < .05]. Importantly, however, in this case rating items for pleasantness produced the best recall, reversing the pattern found in Experiment 2. For the 32
participants, 12 recalled more items rated under the vacation scenario, 17 recalled more items rated for pleasantness, and there were three ties.
Analysis of the rating data revealed no signiﬁcant differences between the two encoding conditions (Vacation = 2.6, Pleasantness = 2.6; F(1, 31) < 1.0). Note that the
average relevance ratings for the vacation condition,
although identical to the ratings given for pleasantness,
were lower than those given for the survival condition in
Experiment 2. Given that the list was categorized, and
the categories were selected to be survival-related, this
ﬁnding is not particularly surprising. We have directly
compared survival processing with a comparable ‘‘vacation” control in previous work, using a list of random
words, and a signiﬁcant survival advantage was obtained
with little or no differences in average ratings (Nairne
et al., 2008). It is also interesting to note that the recall levels for the words rated for pleasantness were higher than
those seen in Experiment 2, even though exactly the same
design and materials were used. We have no explanation
for this ﬁnding, although the pattern across experiments
could be interpreted as an example of a list strength effect
(Tulving & Hastie, 1972). However, the survival advantage
seen in Experiment 2 was also seen in Experiment 1, which
used a between-subject design, so one cannot account for
the effect overall by appealing to encoding variable interactions (e.g., list strength effects, differential output interference, etc.).
For the response time data, participants took signiﬁcantly longer to generate a rating in the vacation condition
[Vacation = 2907.1, Pleasantness = 2658.8; F(1, 31) = 18.84,
MSE = 52333.6, p < .001]. This ﬁnding is important because
it further dissociates response time and recall performance. In this case, the more ‘‘effortful” encoding task—
processing the relevance of items to a vacation scenario—
was associated with poorer free recall performance. As
noted throughout, it is unlikely that any simple appeal to
rating or response time differences will be able to explain
the encoding-based differences in recall seen in these
experiments.
Overall, the results of Experiment 3 conformed to the
expectations of conventional memory theory. It is widely
acknowledged that free recall performance beneﬁts
greatly from encoding procedures that induce a combination of individual item and relational processing. Both
are necessary in order to (a) restrict the memory search
set and (b) discriminate effectively among items within
the set that either did or did not occur (e.g., Hunt &
McDaniel, 1993; Nairne, 2006). In the present case, rating items for pleasantness in an obviously categorized
list led to the best recall, compared to a ‘‘scenario” condition that presumably induced primarily relational processing. As a result, the data lower the chances that the
survival advantages seen in Experiments 1 and 2 can be
attributed simply to the use of scenario- or schemabased processing.

7

General discussion
The crux of the functionalist agenda is the recognition
that memory is functionally designed (Nairne, 2005;
Sherry & Schacter, 1987). As a product of evolution, we
can assume that our ability to remember has been sculpted
by natural selection to achieve speciﬁc ends, much like the
heart is functionally designed to pump blood, or the
kidneys to ﬁlter impurities (Klein et al., 2002; Nairne &
Pandeirada, 2008). Although few question the adaptive
value of memory, or that the ability to remember arose
as a product of evolution, whether human memory continues to bear the footprints of ancestral selection pressures
remains an open, and ultimately empirical, question.
Our laboratory has suggested that memory may be
tuned to process and retain ﬁtness-relevant information—
that is, information that is relevant to survival and ultimately to reproduction. Not all information is equally
important from a ﬁtness perspective, so it is reasonable
to assume that our memory systems show domain-speciﬁcity, or sensitivity to information content. In empirical
support of this idea, we have found that processing information in terms of its survival relevance leads to particularly good retention (Nairne et al., 2008)—better
retention, in fact, than most, if not all, known encoding
techniques (e.g., imagery, self-reference, generation, intentional learning), at least when free recall is used as the
retention measure.
The current experiments were designed with two primary goals in mind. First, we were interested in comparing
the effectiveness of survival processing to yet another
powerful encoding technique, one that encourages individual-item processing of words in a categorized list. Lots of
studies have found that item-based encoding tasks, such
as rating an item for pleasantness, lead to especially good
recall when a list is categorized because such processing
yields distinctive encodings in a context of similarity (Hunt
& McDaniel, 1993; Hunt & Smith, 1996). Despite the recognized superiority of such an encoding procedure, a few seconds of survival processing produced higher levels of free
recall in both Experiments 1 and 2 of the present report.
Second, we were interested in testing one possible, and
conventional, interpretation of the survival advantage. Processing items in terms of their survival relevance can be
conceived as a form of relational processing. Items are processed with respect to a single context, surviving in the
grasslands, and it is possible that participants encode the
items into a relevant ad hoc category that is particularly
accessible at retrieval. In the present experiments, however, survival processing of words in a categorized list,
one containing blocked and salient survival-related categories, continued to produce a reliable survival advantage
compared to pleasantness processing. In such a context,
any survival-based categorical processing should have
been redundant with the information afforded by the list
structure and therefore of limited usefulness in recall.
The survival advantage was obtained as well in a within-subject design, one in which participants made both
survival and pleasantness decisions about items in exactly
the same categories. The survival advantage is important in

Please cite this article in press as: Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J.N.S., Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?, Journal
of Memory and Language (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

ARTICLE IN PRESS
8

J.S. Nairne, J.N.S. Pandeirada / Journal of Memory and Language xxx (2008) xxx–xxx

this context because any effect that survival processing
might have had on category salience or accessibility should
have contributed to recall of both the survival and pleasantness-rated items. The data of both Experiments 1 and
2, as a result, signiﬁcantly lower the chances that enhanced
relational (or categorical) processing is responsible for the
demonstrated survival advantage. Moreover, in Experiment 3 participants were asked to rate the relevance of
words to a vacation scenario, one that presumably also induced relatively greater amounts of relational processing
than the pleasantness task, yet no recall advantage was obtained. Instead, the more typical result was obtained—enhanced memory for the pleasantness rating task,
presumably because it led to combined individual-item
and relational processing.
Do the results of these and other experiments indicate
that survival processing is special? Certainly from an
empirical perspective survival processing is a powerful
encoding technique, leading to better free recall than a
variety of standard encoding techniques. In addition, the
survival advantage is easily obtained in both within- and
between-subject designs, unlike a number of other encoding-based mnemonic phenomena (e.g., the generation effect, word frequency effect, the effect of bizarre imagery,
emotionality, etc.). The typical interpretation of such effects is that the encoding task leads people to focus attention on the individual attributes of the item at the expense
of noting relationships among the items (e.g., as indexed
by poorer memory for temporal order; see McDaniel &
Bugg, 2008, for a review). We have yet to examine the effect of survival processing on the retention of temporal order, but the current experiments revealed no differential
relational processing between conditions. Clearly, any detrimental effects that survival processing may have on order memory are compensated by other mnemonic
advantages.
Perhaps the simplest ‘‘explanation” of the survival
advantage is that it leads to more item-based elaboration,
or ‘‘spread of processing” (e.g., Craik & Tulving, 1975). Similar appeals are commonly used to explain the advantages
of semantic or deep processing—i.e., processing the meaning of an item leads to more connections between the target item and other information in memory. More
elaboration, in turn, increases the chances that appropriate
retrieval cues can be accessed in free recall environments.
However, there is no obvious reason to expect survival processing, which is a relatively novel task, to produce more
elaboration than other procedures that have more relevance to everyday experiences (e.g., moving, restaurant,
or vacation scenarios). One of the failings of modern memory theory is the absence of easily—applied and independent indices of elaboration, so ‘‘elaboration” accounts
remain speculative and difﬁcult to test at this point.
Regardless of the proximate mechanism, it is clearly
adaptive for people to retain ﬁtness-relevant material.
Selection advantages could easily have accrued from a
memory system tuned to remember the location of food
or predators, although it is exceedingly difﬁcult to establish the existence of true cognitive adaptations (Andrews,
Gangestad, & Matthews, 2002; Williams, 1996). Whether
humans evolved functionally specialized circuitry for

remembering ﬁtness-relevant material, or whether retention advantages for ﬁtness-relevant processing arise as a
by-product of other more general mnemonic mechanisms,
remains unclear. At the same time, it is naïve to assume
that our memory systems lack functional design. The
capacity to remember evolved because of the selection
advantages it provided; consequently, we should anticipate that memory contains features that are selectively
tuned to solving adaptive problems related to ﬁtness (Klein
et al., 2002; Nairne, 2005; Rozin, 1976).
Still, one might not expect recall advantages of the type
demonstrated in the current experiments for all kinds of
ﬁtness-relevant materials. Free recall requires a search engine, or retrieval process, that accesses stored information
using a criterion of recent occurrence. It is an episodic task,
one that requires people to generate items that occurred at
a speciﬁed time, in a speciﬁed location, as deﬁned by the
experimental context (Nairne, 1991; Tulving, 1983). From
a functional perspective, the need to remember some ﬁtness-relevant material, such as the location of food, water,
or a possible predator, is often likely to be time-dependent.
In fact, Anderson and Schooler (1991) have shown that forgetting functions often mimic the way that events occur
and recur temporally in the environment. Other kinds of
ﬁtness-relevant information, such as social and personal
characteristics (e.g., is that person a cheater?), may not
show the same kinds of sensitivities to occurrence (see
Barclay & Lalumière, 2006; Mehl & Buchner, 2007).
Conclusion
Our laboratory has made the strong claim that survival
processing represents one of the best—if not the best—
encoding procedures yet discovered in the memory ﬁeld
(Nairne et al., 2008). Is such a claim justiﬁed? Empirically,
we believe the case is strong: Not only does a simple survival rating produce better free recall than a veritable
‘‘who’s who” of known deep encoding procedures, but it
also produces better memory than the prototypical combination of individual-item and relational processing (pleasantness ratings in a categorized list). As noted above,
survival processing is one of the few techniques ever
shown to produce higher levels of recall than a task requiring pleasantness ratings in a categorized list. Regardless of
one’s ultimate interpretation of the survival advantage,
then, adopting a functional perspective can lead to novel
empirical ﬁndings that may challenge existing perspectives on retention.
Acknowledgment
Josefa N.S. Pandeirada was supported by fellowship
SFRH/BPD/21534/2005 from the Portuguese Foundation
for Science and Technology.
References
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reﬂections of the environment in
memory. Psychological Science, 2, 396–408.
Andrews, P. W., Gangestad, S. W., & Matthews, D. (2002). Adaptationism—
How to carry out an exaptationist program. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 25, 489–504.

Please cite this article in press as: Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J.N.S., Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?, Journal
of Memory and Language (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

ARTICLE IN PRESS
J.S. Nairne, J.N.S. Pandeirada / Journal of Memory and Language xxx (2008) xxx–xxx
Barclay, P., & Lalumière, M. L. (2006). Do people differentially remember
cheaters? Human Nature, 17, 98–113.
Barrett, H. C., & Kurzban, R. (2006). Modularity in cognition: Framing the
debate. Psychological Review, 113, 628–647.
Burns, D. J. (1993). Item gains and losses during hypermnesic recall:
Implications for the item-speciﬁc-relational information distinction.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
19, 163–173.
Burns, D. J. (2006). Assessing distinctiveness: Measures of item-speciﬁc
and relational processing. In R. R. Hunt & J. B. Worthen (Eds.),
Distinctiveness and memory (pp. 109–130). Oxford, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework
for memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
11, 671–684.
Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and the retention
of words in episodic memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 104, 268–294.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the origin of species. London: John Murray.
Einstein, G. O., & Hunt, R. R. (1980). Levels of processing and organization:
Additive effects of individual-item and relational processing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6, 588–598.
Engelkamp, J., Biegelmann, U., & McDaniel, M. A. (1998). Relational and
item-speciﬁc information: Trade-off and redundancy. Memory, 6,
307–333.
Hunt, R. R., & Einstein, G. O. (1981). Relational and item-speciﬁc
information in memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 20, 497–514.
Hunt, R. R., & McDaniel, M. A. (1993). The enigma of organization and
distinctiveness. Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 421–445.
Hunt, R. R., & Seta, C. E. (1984). Category size effects in recall: The roles of
relational and individual item information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 454–464.
Hunt, R. R., & Smith, R. E. (1996). Accessing the particular from the
general: The power of distinctiveness in the context of organization.
Memory & Cognition, 24, 217–225.
Hunt, R. R., & Worthen, J. B. (2006). Distinctiveness and memory. Oxford,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Kang, S., McDermott, K. B., & Cohen, S. (in press). The mnemonic
advantage of processing ﬁtness-relevant information. Memory &
Cognition.
Klein, S. B., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., & Chance, S. (2002). Decisions and the
evolution of memory: Multiple systems, multiple functions.
Psychological Review, 109, 306–329.
Klein, S. B., Kihlstrom, J. F., Loftus, J., & Aseron, R. (1989). Effects of itemspeciﬁc and relational information on hypermnesic recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,
1192–1197.
Klein, S. B., & Loftus, J. (1988). The nature of self-referent encoding: The
contributions of elaborative and organizational processes. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 5–11.
Masson, M. E. J., & Loftus, G. R. L. (2003). Using conﬁdence intervals for
graphically based data interpretation. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 57, 203–220.
McDaniel, M. A., & Bugg, J. M. (2008). Instability in memory phenomena:
A common puzzle and a unifying explanation. Psychological Bulletin &
Review, 15, 237–255.
Mehl, B., & Buchner, A. (2007). No enhanced memory for faces of cheaters.
Evolution and Human Behavior, 29, 35–41.
Mulligan, N. W. (1999). The effects of perceptual interference at encoding
on organization and order: Investigating the roles of item-speciﬁc and

9

relational information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 25, 54–69.
Mulligan, N. W. (2001). Generation and hypermnesia. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27,
436–450.
Mulligan, N. W. (2006). Conceptual implicit memory and the itemspeciﬁc-relational distinction. In R. R. Hunt & J. B. Worthen (Eds.),
Distinctiveness and memory (pp. 183–209). Oxford, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Nairne, J. S. (1991). Positional uncertainty in long-term memory. Memory
& Cognition, 19, 332–340.
Nairne, J. S. (2005). The functionalist agenda in memory research. In A. F.
Healy (Ed.), Experimental cognitive psychology and its applications
(pp. 115–126). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Nairne, J. S. (2006). Modeling distinctiveness: Implications for general
memory theory. In R. R. Hunt & J. B. Worthen (Eds.), Distinctiveness
and memory (pp. 27–46). Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press.
Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2007). Adaptive memory: Is survival
processing special? Paper presented at the 48th annual meeting of the
psychonomic society.
Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2008). Adaptive memory:
Remembering with a stone-age brain. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 17, 239–243.
Nairne, J. S., Pandeirada, J. N. S., & Thompson, S. R. (2008). Adaptive
memory: The comparative value of survival processing. Psychological
Science, 19, 176–180.
Nairne, J. S., Thompson, S. R., & Pandeirada, J. N. S. (2007). Adaptive
memory: Survival processing enhances retention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33,
263–273.
Packman, J. L., & Battig, W. F. (1978). Effects of different kinds of semantic
processing on memory for words. Memory & Cognition, 6, 502–508.
Roenker, D. L., Thompson, C. P., & Brown, S. C. (1971). Comparison of
measures for the estimation of clustering in free recall. Psychological
Bulletin, 76, 45–48.
Rozin, P. (1976). The psychobiological approach to human memory. In M.
R. Rosenzweig & E. L. Bennett (Eds.), Neural mechanisms of learning and
memory (pp. 3–48). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Schulman, A. I. (1974). Memory for words recently classiﬁed. Memory &
Cognition, 2, 47–52.
Sherry, D. F., & Schacter, D. L. (1987). The evolution of multiple memory
systems. Psychological Review, 94, 439–454.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1992). The psychological foundations of culture.
In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind:
Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 19–136).
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Tulving, E., & Hastie, R. (1972). Inhibition effects of intralist repetition in
free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 92, 297–304.
Tulving, E., & Pearlstone, Z. (1966). Availability versus accessibility of
information in memory for words. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 5, 381–391.
Van Overschelde, J. P., Rawson, K. A., & Dunlosky, J. (2004). Category
norms: An updated and expanded version of the norms. Journal of
Memory and Language, 50, 289–335.
Weinstein, Y., Bugg, J. M., & Roediger, H. L. (2008). Can the survival recall
advantage be explained by the basic memory processes? Memory &
Cognition, 36, 913–919.
Williams, G. C. (1996). Adaptation and natural selection: A critique of some
current evolutionary thought. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Please cite this article in press as: Nairne, J. S., & Pandeirada, J.N.S., Adaptive memory: Is survival processing special?, Journal
of Memory and Language (2008), doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.001

