P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Research Article

Beyond Fear
Rapid Spatial Orienting Toward Positive Emotional Stimuli
Tobias Brosch,1,2 David Sander,1,2 Gilles Pourtois,1,3 and Klaus R. Scherer1,2
1

Swiss Centre for Affective Sciences, 2Department of Psychology, and 3Neurology and Imaging of Cognition Laboratory,
University of Geneva

ABSTRACT—There

is much empirical evidence for modulation of attention by negative—particularly fear-relevant—
emotional stimuli. This modulation is often explained in
terms of a fear module. Appraisal theories of emotion posit a
more general mechanism, predicting attention capture by
stimuli that are relevant for the needs and goals of the
organism, regardless of valence. To examine the brain-activation patterns underlying attentional modulation, we recorded event-related potentials from 20 subjects performing
a dot-probe task in which the cues were fear-inducing and
nurturance-inducing stimuli (i.e., anger faces and baby
faces). Highly similar validity modulation was found for
the P1 time-locked to target onset, indicating early attentional capture by both positive and negative emotional stimuli. Topographic segmentation analysis and source localization indicate that the same ampliﬁcation process is involved whether attention orienting is triggered by negative,
fear-relevant stimuli or positive, nurturance-relevant stimuli. These results conﬁrm that biological relevance, and not
exclusively fear, produces an automatic spatial orienting
toward the location of a stimulus.
The human organism is constantly bombarded by environmental
stimulation. Because of capacity limits, the brain needs to select
stimuli that require in-depth processing (Desimone & Duncan,
1995). In addition to physical features such as color or size
(Wolfe & Horowitz, 2004), emotional relevance seems to be a
central selection criterion (Vuilleumier, 2005).
Capture of selective attention by emotional stimuli1 has been
thoroughly documented in studies using experimental paradigms such as visual search (Brosch & Sharma, 2005; Öhman,
Flykt, & Esteves, 2001) and dot-probe tasks (MacLeod, MaAddress correspondence to Tobias Brosch, Swiss Centre for Affective
Sciences, University of Geneva, 7, Rue des Battoirs, 1205 Geneva,
Switzerland, e-mail: tobias.brosch@pse.unige.ch.
1

We use ‘‘emotional stimuli’’ as a shorthand for ‘‘stimuli with a high potential
for inducing emotion.’’

362

thews, & Tata, 1986; Mogg & Bradley, 1999). In the latter (see
Fig. 1), participants indicate the location or identity of a target
that replaces one of two simultaneously presented pictorial cues.
One cue is emotionally signiﬁcant (e.g., an emotional face or
word), and the other is neutral. Participants show facilitated
processing if the target replaces the emotional cue, rather than
the neutral cue, as reﬂected by improved perceptual processing
(Phelps, Ling, & Carrasco, 2006) or faster response times
(Lipp & Derakshan, 2005; Mogg & Bradley, 1999) at the target’s
location. Mogg and Bradley compared the differential impact of
angry and happy faces on subsequent target processing. They
found faster response times when targets replaced angry faces
rather than neutral faces, but no such facilitation for happy
faces compared with neutral faces. Lipp and Derakshan used
fear-relevant animals (snakes, spiders) and non-fear-relevant
stimuli (ﬂowers, mushrooms) as cues and found response facilitation by fear-relevant cues similar to that observed for angry
faces, results consistent with the assumed attentional priority
given to threat-related stimuli (see Öhman & Mineka, 2001).
These behavioral results were conﬁrmed in studies using the
scalp event-related potential (ERP), a well-established neurophysiological measure for tracking the timing of attentional
modulation in paradigms like the dot-probe task (Mangun,
1995). Converging ERP results have indicated that selective
attention reliably enhances the amplitude of the early P1 exogenous
visual response (e.g., Luck, Woodman, & Vogel, 2000). Amplitude
modulation of the P1 as a function of deployment of visuospatial
attention is thought to reﬂect a sensory gain-control mechanism by
means of which attended locations or stimuli receive increased
perceptual processing in the visual cortex (Hillyard, Vogel, & Luck,
1998). Pourtois, Grandjean, Sander, and Vuilleumier (2004)
recorded ERPs during a dot-probe task and observed a selective
increase in P1 amplitude for targets replacing a fearful face
compared with those replacing a neutral or happy face.
These and other results (for reviews, see Compton, 2003;
Vuilleumier, 2005) imply that early modulation of attention is
restricted to fear-relevant stimuli. It is thus not surprising that
Öhman and Mineka’s (2001) suggestion that the human brain is

Copyright
r 2008at Association
for Psychological
Downloaded from
pss.sagepub.com
Bobst Library, New
York University onScience
April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 4

T. Brosch et al.

equipped with a fear module subserving modulation of selective
attention to evolutionarily prepared threat stimuli is widely
accepted. However, like other modular accounts, this explanation proposes no general mechanism; further modules need to be
introduced to explain speciﬁc effects for other emotions or types
of stimuli (Panksepp & Panksepp, 2000).
In contrast, appraisal theories suggest a general mechanism
in which the rapid, multilevel assessment of stimulus relevance
for the goals, needs, and well-being of the individual, irrespective of stimulus valence, is the central determinant of emotion (Ellsworth & Scherer, 2003). These theories predict that
highly relevant stimuli requiring potential response mobilization are rapidly allocated increased amounts of attention and
processing resources (Scherer, 2001). This allocation facilitates
enhanced perceptual analysis of such stimuli and triggers synchronized changes in the autonomic, motor, and motivational
systems to prepare the organism for adaptive behavioral responses (Sander, Grandjean, & Scherer, 2005). This general
mechanism is expected to operate on different classes of stimuli,
producing widely varying emotions, both negative and positive.
At ﬁrst sight, the results reported earlier appear to contradict
the predictions of appraisal theories, as only negative, threatrelated stimuli produced attentional capture. However, most
studies have compared either only fear-relevant and neutral
stimuli (e.g., Brosch & Sharma, 2005; Flykt, 2005; Lipp &
Derakshan, 2005; Öhman et al., 2001) or facial expressions of
fear or anger and happy expressions (e.g., Fox et al., 2000; Mogg

& Bradley, 1999; Pourtois et al., 2004). Studies in the ﬁrst group
do not critically test the two theoretical accounts. The evidence
from the second group is inconclusive because positive emotionrelevant stimuli have been represented exclusively by facial
expressions of happiness. We suggest that these stimuli have a
much lower level of relevance to the observer than do threatrelated expressions, particularly regarding the need for rapid
in-depth processing for response preparation. In real life, if
someone stares at you with an angry face, you need to worry
about impending aggression. If someone looks at you with a
fearful face, you need to determine its cause to evaluate possible
consequences for your well-being. In both cases, you need to
rapidly allocate attention to the person in order to prepare an
appropriate response. However, when someone smiles at you,
whether from friendliness or personal happiness, no urgent response is required; the smile may be a safety signal, suggesting
that you can relax.
Thus, the response-demand characteristics of angry or fearful expressions are a priori different from those of expressions
of happiness. Consequently, the need for attentional capture differs in the two cases, and the experimental comparison that
has been the focus of previous studies is unsuitable for testing
the hypothesis that positive emotion-relevant stimuli are as
likely to produce rapid attentional capture as negative stimuli
are. To test this hypothesis, the experimental stimuli must be of
comparable relevance, particularly as regards the mobilization
of response preparation and the need for rapid in-depth analysis

Fig. 1. Illustration of the experimental sequence. Each trial started with a ﬁxation cross. Then the cue, consisting of two images presented on the left and right sides of the screen, was presented brieﬂy. One of the two
pictures was an emotional face, and the other was a neutral face. Following offset of the face pair, the ﬁxation
cross was presented randomly for 100, 150, 200, 250, or 300 ms. Afterward, the target, a triangle pointing upward or downward, appeared for 150 ms in the location of one of the previously presented faces. In a valid trial,
the triangle was in the location of the emotional image; in an invalid trial, the triangle was in the location of the
neutral image. Some participants were required to respond if the triangle pointed upward, and the others were
required to respond if the stimulus pointed downward. SOA 5 stimulus onset asynchrony.

Volume 19—Number 4

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

363

Rapid Spatial Orienting Toward Positive Emotional Stimuli

(presumably the driving force behind attentional capture).
Öhman and his collaborators have suggested that threat-related
stimuli are treated rapidly and at a very low level of processing
because of their evolutionary signiﬁcance (Öhman & Mineka, 2001);
such stimuli should be compared with positive emotion-relevant
stimuli that are most likely to have a similar phylogenetic basis.
We suggest using photos of newborn infants for this purpose.
Newborns are a prototypical example of a class of stimuli that are
positive and highly biologically relevant. They can be expected
to elicit a phylogenetically based readiness for response preparation (as threat does) because appropriate behavior toward
newborns, such as providing warmth and nurturance, is relevant
for survival of the species. The central eliciting feature could be
the Kindchenschema (baby schema; Lorenz, 1943), a conﬁguration
of perceptual features found in newborns of various species,
including a high, slightly bulging forehead; large eyes; and
rounded cheeks. Lorenz observed that many animals, including
humans, respond to these key stimuli with positive emotions and
behavior patterns of parental care, such as approach tendencies,
protective behavior, and increased attention toward the infant. The
degree of Kindchenschema in adult faces correlates with positive
attributes such as cuteness, warmth, fondness, and honesty (Berry
& McArthur, 1985). Recently, we presented preliminary behavioral evidence for attentional capture by Kindchenschema stimuli
(Brosch, Sander, & Scherer, 2007). However, behavioral data
alone do not reveal whether the effect reﬂects modulation of early
sensory perceptual processing of the target or modulation of later,
postperceptual stages, such as response selection.
In the study reported here, we wanted to directly compare the
attentional modulation elicited by biologically relevant stimuli with
positive valence and by fear-relevant stimuli and to test the hypothesis that the underlying patterns of brain activation are highly
similar in the two cases, as one would expect if a general mechanism,
such as relevance appraisal, was involved in processing the stimuli.
We recorded electroencephalographic (EEG) data as participants
performed a standard dot-probe task (MacLeod et al., 1986) in
which the emotional stimuli were fear-relevant angry faces and
positive-emotion-relevant baby faces. We predicted modulation
of the P1 in the form of larger amplitudes toward validly cued
targets compared with invalidly cued targets. The hypothesis
that attentional modulation for positive and negative stimuli is
driven by the same appraisal process predicted that this P1
modulation would be similar for the angry faces and baby faces.
To formally test the hypothesis that there is one common underlying process, we complemented the conventional
ERP analysis with topographic segmentation analysis (Michel,
Seeck, & Landis, 1999). The latter is a data-driven analysis that
considers the entire electric ﬁeld without any a priori choice of
channels or time frames, as typically required by conventional
ERP analysis (Picton et al., 2000). Stable topographic maps of
scalp electrical activity are identiﬁed using a standard clustering
method (Pascual-Marqui, Michel, & Lehmann, 1994). Different
scalp maps necessarily denote activation of distinct conﬁgura-

364

tions of intracranial generators (Lehmann & Skrandies, 1980).
This method has been applied in various domains of psychology
and neuroscience to gain insight into the spatiotemporal dynamics of sensory or cognitive processes (see Michel et al., 1999).
In this experiment, it was important to establish whether the
scalp topography that emerged (and not only the measured amplitude or latency of predeﬁned ERP components) would differ
substantially between the angry and the baby conditions. We
predicted that the conﬁguration of the electric ﬁeld corresponding
to the P1 ERP component (and the estimated generating source)
would be identical for the two types of faces, and that only the
cuing manipulation would produce a change in the strength of
electrical activity (greater activation in the valid condition than in
the invalid condition).
METHOD

Participants
Twenty University of Geneva students (15 females, 5 males;
mean age 5 24.0 years) participated in the EEG experiment.
Thirteen others (all females; mean age 5 23.4 years) participated in a behavioral control experiment. All participants were
right-handed, had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and had
no history of psychiatric or neurological diseases.
Stimuli
The stimuli for the anger trials consisted of eight gray-scale
images showing adult faces with angry expressions and eight
gray-scale images showing adult faces with neutral expressions
(taken from Ekman & Friesen, 1976). The stimuli for the baby
trials consisted of gray-scale images taken from the Internet;
eight showed infant faces with neutral expressions, and eight
showed adult faces with neutral expressions. Quantitative analyses conﬁrmed that the anger and baby stimulus sets did not
differ statistically in luminance, contrast, or mean energy in
spatial-frequency bands.
Procedure
The experiment consisted of one practice block of 12 trials,
followed by four experimental blocks of 160 trials each. In the
two blocks of baby trials, neutral baby and neutral adult faces
were presented, and in the two blocks of anger trials, angry adult
and neutral adult faces were shown. Block order was counterbalanced across participants.
In the EEG experiment, we included only a small number
(10%) of trials that required a motor response (i.e., go trials). In
the vast majority of trials (no-go trials, 90%), no overt motor
response was required. This design allowed us to study covert
spatial orienting toward emotional stimuli without contamination of EEG signal quality by motor preparation or execution.
The behavioral control experiment used the same stimuli and
task as the EEG experiment. The only difference was that we increased the number of go trials from 10% to 50% in order to
collect enough behavioral responses for statistical analyses.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 4

T. Brosch et al.

On each trial (see Fig. 1), a ﬁxation cross (presented for a
randomly selected duration between 500 and 1,000 ms) was
followed by a cue consisting of two images, one on either side of
the screen. The cue was presented brieﬂy (100 ms) to avoid any
systematic saccadic eye movement. One of the two pictures
always showed an emotional face, and the other showed a neutral
one. The pictures were randomly selected from within each
emotion category. The images measured 7  10 cm, and the
distance between the ﬁxation cross and the center of each image
was 15 cm. Participants were seated in front of the screen at a
viewing distance of 100 cm, resulting in a visual angle of 8.51
between the ﬁxation cross and the center of each image. Following offset of the face pair, the ﬁxation cross was presented for a
randomly selected interval of 100, 150, 200, 250, or 300 ms.
Afterward, the target, a triangle pointing upward or downward,
appeared for 150 ms, in the location of one of the prior images.
On valid trials, the triangle appeared at the location previously
occupied by the emotional image (anger or baby); on invalid
trials, the triangle appeared at the location previously occupied
by the neutral image. Valid and invalid trials were presented in
randomized order in equal proportions (.50).
Participants were instructed to use their right index ﬁnger to
press the ‘‘B’’ key of the response keyboard when the triangle
was in a particular orientation (pointing upward or downward,
counterbalanced across participants). They had a maximum of
1,750 ms to respond, after which the next trial started.
EEG Recording
EEG was recorded with a sampling rate of 512 Hz using the
ActiveTwo system (BioSemi, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).
Electro-oculogram was recorded using four facial electrodes
placed on the outer canthi of the eyes and in the inferior and
superior areas of the left orbit. Scalp EEG was recorded from 64
Ag/AgCl electrodes attached to an electrode cap and positioned
according to the extended 10–20 system. The EEG electrodes
were referenced off-line to average reference. Data were ﬁltered
using a high pass of 0.53 Hz and a low pass of 30 Hz, downsampled to 256 Hz, and segmented around target onsets in
epochs of 600 ms (from 200 ms to 1400 ms). The algorithm
developed by Gratton, Coles, and Donchin (1983) was used to
reduce artifacts from eye movements. Baseline correction was
performed using the 200-ms prestimulus interval. EEG epochs
in which the signal exceeded 70 mV were excluded. Artifact-free
epochs were averaged separately for each electrode, condition,
and individual. Bad channels were interpolated using spherical
splines. Grand-average ERPs were generated by computing mean
ERPs across subjects in each condition.
Data Analysis
Behavioral Control Experiment
To assess modulation of perceptual sensitivity by cue validity,
we calculated the discrimination measure d 0 , which is based on

Volume 19—Number 4

signal detection theory (Green & Swets, 1966). In the present
experiment, higher d 0 values indicate that the signal (compared
with noise) at a given location is more salient and more easily
recognized. The d 0 values were analyzed using a repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the factors of emotion
type (baby, anger) and cue validity (invalid, valid).
EEG Experiment
First, we performed classical ERP analyses (Picton et al., 2000).
To test our a priori hypotheses, we analyzed the P1 component
(120–170 ms) time-locked to target onset in valid and invalid
trials. P1 amplitudes and latencies were measured at lateral
occipital sites, where amplitudes for this component were maximal
(PO3/PO7 and PO4/PO8). These sites had shown related effects in
previous studies (Di Russo, Martinez, & Hillyard, 2003; Pourtois
et al., 2004). Amplitudes and latencies of P1 were analyzed using
a 2  2  2  2  2 ANOVA with the repeated factors of emotion
type (baby, anger), cue validity (invalid, valid), target side (left,
right), hemisphere (left, right), and electrode position (inner: PO3,
PO4; outer: PO7, PO8).
Next, we analyzed topographic changes in the ERP data using
a conventional clustering method (Pascual-Marqui et al., 1994).
We identiﬁed the dominant scalp topographic maps of global
explained variance in the grand-average ERP data by performing a K-means clustering on all four conditions (2 emotion
types  2 cue validities) concurrently from target onset until 400
ms after target onset. Dominant scalp maps were identiﬁed using
an objective cross-validation criterion. We statistically veriﬁed
the reliability of the dominant maps by ﬁtting them to individual
subjects’ ERP data. The rationale of this temporal segmentation
method has been extensively described elsewhere (Michel et al.,
1999), and the clustering method has already been applied to analyze ERP data collected during attentional and emotional paradigms (Pourtois, Thut, Grave de Peralta, Michel, & Vuilleumier,
2005). To estimate the likely conﬁguration of intracranial neural
sources underlying the observed scalp topographic maps of
interest, we used a distributed inverse solution method derived
from biophysical laws describing electrical ﬁelds in the brain
(local auto-regressive average, or LAURA; see Grave de Peralta
Menendez, Gonzalez Andino, Lantz, Michel, & Landis, 2001).
This method computes a three-dimensional reconstruction of the
generators of the brain’s electromagnetic activity measured at the
scalp from biophysically driven inverse solutions, without a priori
assumptions about the number and position of possible generators.
RESULTS

Behavioral Performance in the Control Experiment
Statistical analyses of d 0 scores (see Fig. 2) showed a main effect
of cue validity, F(1, 12) 5 30.91, p < .001, Zp 2 ¼ :72. Discrimination of the target’s orientation was reliably better on valid
than on invalid trials. Post hoc t tests showed signiﬁcant validity
effects for both the anger condition, t(12) 5 2.26, p 5 .02

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

365

Rapid Spatial Orienting Toward Positive Emotional Stimuli

(1.8 mV) trials, as indicated by the signiﬁcant main effect of
cue validity, F(1, 18) 5 9.33, p 5 .007, Zp 2 ¼ :34. For latency
of the P1, the main effect of cue validity was not statistically
signiﬁcant, F(1, 18) 5 0.101, p 5 .75.

Fig. 2. Results from the behavioral control experiment: d 0 values as a
function of condition (2 emotion types  2 cue validities). Asterisks
indicate signiﬁcant differences between conditions.

(one-tailed), and the baby condition, t(12) 5 3.82, p 5 .001
(one-tailed). Neither the main effect of emotion type nor the
interaction of emotion type and cue validity reached statistical
signiﬁcance, both Fs < 1, ps > .45.
ERP Analysis
Data from 1 female participant were excluded because of poor
quality of the electrophysiological recordings. Figure 3a shows
the potentials time-locked to target onset, averaged across all
conditions. Figure 3b shows ERPs at electrode PO7 for baby
trials and anger trials in the valid and invalid conditions.
The main effect of cue validity, F(1, 18) 5 16.03, p 5 .001,
Zp 2 ¼ :47, indicated that P1 amplitude was larger on valid
(2.2 mV) than on invalid (1.7 mV) trials. This effect was driven
mainly by targets presented to the left visual ﬁeld, as indicated
by the Cue Validity  Target Side interaction, F(1, 18) 5 4.518,
p 5 .05, Zp 2 ¼ :20. The Emotion Type  Cue Validity interaction was not statistically signiﬁcant, F(1, 18) 5 0.07, p 5 .20.
For latency of the P1, neither the main effect of cue validity nor
the Emotion Type  Cue Validity interaction was statistically
signiﬁcant, Fs < 1, ps > .60. The statistical power (1b) for
detecting a large effect was .90 for the main effects and .99
for the interactions (Cohen, 1988).
A separate analysis of the baby trials revealed that P1 amplitude was larger on valid (2.2 mV) than on invalid (1.7 mV)
trials, as indicated by the signiﬁcant main effect of cue validity,
F(1, 18) 5 9.44, p 5 .007, Zp 2 ¼ :34. For latency of the P1, the
main effect of cue validity was not statistically signiﬁcant,
F(1, 18) 5 0.06, p 5 .80. On valid trials, the P1 peaked earlier
for targets presented to the right visual ﬁeld (148 ms) than for
targets presented to the left visual ﬁeld (153 ms), as indicated
by the signiﬁcant Cue Validity  Target Side interaction, F(1,
18) 5 5.4, p 5 .032, Zp 2 ¼ :23.
Similarly, a separate analysis of the anger trials revealed that
P1 amplitude was larger on valid (2.2 mV) than on invalid

366

Temporal Segmentation and Source Localization
Temporal segmentation was performed for each of the four
conditions (2 emotion types  2 cue validities), from target onset
until 400 ms poststimulus. Spatial cluster analysis revealed that
grand-average ERP data were modeled reliably by a solution
including a sequence of eight different maps. This solution explained 95.3% of the total variance. Given our a priori hypotheses
related to the P1, we further analyzed the map that corresponded
to the manifestation of the P1 (see Fig. 4a). Subsequent statistical analyses conﬁrmed that this map was identical across
the four conditions, suggesting that the neural generators at the
origin of the P1 were indistinguishable across the speciﬁc
conditions.
A 2  2 ANOVA with the factors of emotion type (baby, anger)
and cue validity (invalid, valid) was performed on the global
explained variance of the P1 map. Most important, no differences between anger and baby trials were found; neither the
main effect of emotion type, F < 1, p 5 .93, nor the Emotion
Type  Cue Validity interaction, F(1, 18) 5 2.598, p 5 .12, was
statistically signiﬁcant. The only signiﬁcant effect was a main
effect of cue validity, F(1, 18) 5 4.79, p 5 .04, Zp 2 ¼ :21; the
global variance explained by the P1 map was greater for valid
(mean global explained variance, GEV 5 30) than for invalid
(mean GEV 5 23) trials, a ﬁnding consistent with the outcome of
the conventional P1 ERP analysis reported earlier.
Finally, we conﬁrmed that the intracranial generators of the
P1 were located in striate and extrastriate visual cortex (see
Fig. 4b), a pattern that has been found repeatedly when examining generators of this early visual response (e.g., Martinez
et al., 1999).2

DISCUSSION

In this study, we tested the hypothesis that biologically relevant
stimuli with a positive valence and fear-relevant stimuli may
elicit attentional modulation with similar time courses and underlying neural generators.
Analysis of behavioral data showed a reliable gain in orientation discrimination of the target on valid trials, relative to invalid
trials, in both the positive-emotion (baby) and the negativeemotion (anger) conditions. This ﬁnding extends the preliminary
results we reported previously (Brosch et al., 2007) and contrasts
2
The reliability of the source localization was conﬁrmed using brain electrical source analysis (BESA; Scherg, Vajsar, & Picton, 1989), a distinct inverse
solution method. The results of that analysis are highly compatible with the
LAURA solution.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 4

T. Brosch et al.

a
Fpz

Fz

Cz

Pz
PO4

PO3
PO7

PO8

Oz

b
PO7

−4

μV

PO7
N1

−3

− 4 μV
N1

−3

−2

−2

−1

−1
300 ms

1

1

2

300 ms

P1

Baby Invalid

2

Baby Valid
3

P1

Anger Invalid
Anger Valid

3

Fig. 3. Results from the event-related potential (ERP) analysis: (a) ERPs at each electrode, time-locked to the onset of the target and
averaged across all conditions, and (b) ERPs at electrode PO7 in the valid and invalid conditions on baby trials (left panel) and anger
trials (right panel). The electrodes selected for further statistical analyses are outlined by boxes in (a).

Volume 19—Number 4

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

367

Rapid Spatial Orienting Toward Positive Emotional Stimuli

Fig. 4. Result of the topographic segmentation: (a) map representing the P1 potential (collapsing across the target presentation in left and right visual
ﬁelds) and (b) inverse solution (based on local auto-regressive average, or LAURA) for the map representing the P1 potential in all four conditions.

with results from previous studies that found an effect when using
negative cues (angry faces) but not positive cues (happy faces).
Analysis of the P1 component revealed higher amplitudes for
validly than for invalidly cued targets, in both the baby and the
anger conditions. This effect reﬂects early orientation of spatial
attention toward the location of emotional cues. It is plausible to
assume that our results were due to the emotional cues’ high
biological relevance, and the resulting need for in-depth stimulus processing in the service of response or action preparation.
However, despite our efforts at experimental control, we cannot
exclude the possibility that other stimulus characteristics were
responsible for the effects or contributed to them. Further work
needs to establish the robustness of the hypothesized effect.3
The topographic brain activity during the time course of the
P1 is best explained by a dominant map that is indistinguishable
across the four conditions. This topographic map explains more
global variance for valid than for invalid trials, an observation
that corroborates the ERP ﬁndings of increased P1 amplitude on
valid trials. Source localization for this map suggests generators
of the P1 component in striate and occipito-temporal extrastriate
areas. It is noteworthy that conventional ERP analyses and topographic segmentation analysis converged on two central ﬁndings:
(a) Both the fear-relevant and the positive stimuli modulated attention relatively early during stimulus processing, and (b) the
same (or highly similar) ampliﬁcation processes and neural struc3

One might hypothesize that seeing more adult faces than baby faces during
the experiment drove the attentional-capture effect. However, when we analyzed only data from the ﬁrst experimental block for participants who started
with a block of baby trials, we obtained a highly similar pattern of results. This
suggests that it was not the relative frequency of baby stimuli, but rather their
emotional relevance, that captured attention.

368

tures seemed to be involved in attention orienting triggered by
fear-relevant and positive-emotion-relevant stimuli.
This evidence strongly supports the idea that a common
appraisal process underlies attentional modulation toward various kinds of relevant stimuli. The classical ERP analyses were
based on previous work on attentional modulation and a priori
hypotheses about electrode position and the time course of
modulation (Luck et al., 2000; Pourtois et al., 2004), whereas
the data-driven topographic analysis did not make any a priori
assumptions about the spatial orienting effect in the ERP data.
The similarity between the results obtained using these two
complementary methods is remarkable and conﬁrms the robustness of the attentional-modulation effect.
In conclusion, by choosing a stimulus type that was expected
to have biological relevance comparable to that of threat stimuli,
we obtained highly similar attentional-modulation effects for
positive and negative emotional stimuli. Such effects have not
been demonstrated in previous studies that used happy faces as
positive stimuli.
Most important, this study provides the ﬁrst evidence that
brain-activation patterns underlying attentional capture are
similar for negative and positive stimuli and seem to be generated by the same brain structures. This evidence suggests that a
fear module dedicated to processing fear-relevant stimuli is not
needed to account for attentional orienting. Rather, our results
suggest that a common early and probably automatic appraisal of
relevance modulates attentional resources allocated to negative
(including fear-related) and positive stimuli that are highly
relevant for the organism and involve response preparation. It
could be argued that our results provide evidence only for the
similarity of the ﬁnal efferent outcome of attention recruitment,

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 4

T. Brosch et al.

which could be triggered by two different detection modules.
However, there is little evidence for the existence of such
modules (and no coherent account of the structures and mechanisms involved), and an increasing number of studies show that
the amygdala (often suggested as the location of a fear module;
Calder, Lawrence, & Young, 2001; Öhman & Mineka, 2001)
is strongly involved in the general processing of relevance,
including relevance of positive stimulation (Fitzgerald, Angstadt,
Jelsone, Nathan, & Phan, 2006; Sander, Grafman, & Zalla, 2003).
Therefore, it is more parsimonious and more plausible to assume
a general appraisal mechanism based on relevance detection
in the service of response preparation. We suggest that this theoretical framework should be accorded a privileged position in
further research and that future studies should explore the precise
nature of the relevance appraisal required for a stimulus to capture attention.
Acknowledgments—This research was supported by the National Centre of Competence in Research for Affective Sciences,
ﬁnanced by the Swiss National Science Foundation. We would
like to thank Diego Pizzagalli for helpful comments on an earlier
draft of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Berry, D.S., & McArthur, L. (1985). Some components and consequences of a babyface. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 312–323.
Brosch, T., Sander, D., & Scherer, K.R. (2007). That baby caught my
eye. . . Attention capture by infant faces. Emotion, 7, 685–689.
Brosch, T., & Sharma, D. (2005). The role of fear-relevant stimuli in
visual search: A comparison of phylogenetic and ontogenetic
stimuli. Emotion, 5, 360–364.
Calder, A.J., Lawrence, A.D., & Young, A.W. (2001). Neuropsychology
of fear and loathing. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 352–363.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Compton, R.J. (2003). The interface between emotion and attention:
A review of evidence from psychology and neuroscience. Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews, 2, 115–129.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective
visual attention. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 18, 193–222.
Di Russo, F., Martinez, A., & Hillyard, S.A. (2003). Source analysis of
event-related cortical activity during visuo-spatial attention. Cerebral Cortex, 13, 486–499.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W.V. (1976). Pictures of facial affect. Palo Alto,
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Ellsworth, P.C., & Scherer, K.R. (2003). Appraisal processes in emotion. In R.J. Davidson, H.H. Goldsmith, & K.R. Scherer (Eds.),
Handbook of affective sciences (pp. 572–595). Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press.
Fitzgerald, D.A., Angstadt, M., Jelsone, L.M., Nathan, P.J., & Phan,
K.L. (2006). Beyond threat: Amygdala reactivity across multiple
expressions of facial affect. NeuroImage, 30, 1441–1448.
Flykt, A. (2005). Visual search with biological threat stimuli: Accuracy, reaction times, and heart rate changes. Emotion, 5, 349–353.

Volume 19—Number 4

Fox, E., Lester, V., Russo, R., Bowles, R.J., Pichler, A., & Dutton, K.
(2000). Facial expressions of emotion: Are angry faces detected
more efﬁciently? Cognition & Emotion, 14, 61–92.
Gratton, G., Coles, M.G., & Donchin, E. (1983). A new method for
off-line removal of ocular artifact. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, 55, 468–484.
Grave de Peralta Menendez, R., Gonzalez Andino, S., Lantz, G.,
Michel, C.M., & Landis, T. (2001). Noninvasive localization of
electromagnetic epileptic activity: I. Method descriptions and simulations. Brain Topography, 14, 131–137.
Green, D., & Swets, J. (1966). Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Robert E. Krieger.
Hillyard, S.A., Vogel, E.K., & Luck, S.J. (1998). Sensory gain control (ampliﬁcation) as a mechanism of selective attention: Electrophysiological and neuroimaging evidence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 353, 1257–
1270.
Lehmann, D., & Skrandies, W. (1980). Reference-free identiﬁcation of
components of checkerboard-evoked multichannel potential ﬁelds.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 48, 609–
621.
Lipp, O.V., & Derakshan, N. (2005). Attentional bias to pictures of
fear-relevant animals in a dot probe task. Emotion, 5, 365–369.
Lorenz, K. (1943). Die angeborenen Formen möglicher Erfahrung [The
innate forms of potential experience]. Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie, 5, 233–519.
Luck, S.J., Woodman, G.F., & Vogel, E.K. (2000). Event-related potential
studies of attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 432–440.
MacLeod, C., Mathews, A., & Tata, P. (1986). Attentional bias in
emotional disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 15–20.
Mangun, G.R. (1995). Neural mechanisms of visual selective attention.
Psychophysiology, 32, 4–18.
Martinez, A., Anllo-Vento, L., Sereno, M.I., Frank, L.R., Buxton, R.B.,
Dubowitz, D.J., et al. (1999). Involvement of striate and extrastriate visual cortical areas in spatial attention. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 364–369.
Michel, C.M., Seeck, M., & Landis, T. (1999). Spatiotemporal dynamics
of human cognition. News in Physiological Sciences, 14, 206–214.
Mogg, K., & Bradley, B.P. (1999). Orienting of attention to threatening
facial expressions presented under conditions of restricted awareness. Cognition & Emotion, 13, 713–740.
Öhman, A., Flykt, A., & Esteves, F. (2001). Emotion drives attention:
Detecting the snake in the grass. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 466–478.
Öhman, A., & Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobias, and preparedness:
Toward an evolved module of fear and fear learning. Psychological Review, 108, 483–522.
Panksepp, J., & Panksepp, J.B. (2000). The seven sins of evolutionary
psychology. Evolution and Cognition, 6, 108–131.
Pascual-Marqui, R.D., Michel, C.M., & Lehmann, D. (1994). Low
resolution electromagnetic tomography: A new method for localizing electrical activity in the brain. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 18, 49–65.
Phelps, E.A., Ling, S., & Carrasco, M. (2006). Emotion facilitates
perception and potentiates the perceptual beneﬁts of attention.
Psychological Science, 17, 292–299.
Picton, T.W., Bentin, S., Berg, P., Donchin, E., Hillyard, S.A., Johnson,
R., Jr., et al. (2000). Guidelines for using human event-related
potentials to study cognition: Recording standards and publication criteria. Psychophysiology, 37, 127–152.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

369

Rapid Spatial Orienting Toward Positive Emotional Stimuli

Pourtois, G., Grandjean, D., Sander, D., & Vuilleumier, P. (2004).
Electrophysiological correlates of rapid spatial orienting towards
fearful faces. Cerebral Cortex, 14, 619–633.
Pourtois, G., Thut, G., Grave de Peralta, R., Michel, C., & Vuilleumier,
P. (2005). Two electrophysiological stages of spatial orienting
towards fearful faces: Early temporo-parietal activation preceding gain control in extrastriate visual cortex. NeuroImage, 26,
149–163.
Sander, D., Grafman, J., & Zalla, T. (2003). The human amygdala:
An evolved system for relevance detection. Reviews in the Neurosciences, 14, 303–316.
Sander, D., Grandjean, D., & Scherer, K.R. (2005). A systems approach to appraisal mechanisms in emotion. Neural Networks, 18,
317–352.
Scherer, K.R. (2001). Appraisal considered as a process of multilevel
sequential checking. In K.R. Scherer, A. Schorr, & T. Johnstone

370

(Eds.), Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory, methods, research
(pp. 92–120). New York: Oxford University Press.
Scherg, M., Vajsar, J., & Picton, T.W. (1989). A source analysis of the late
human auditory evoked potentials. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 1, 336–355.
Vuilleumier, P. (2005). How brains beware: Neural mechanisms of emotional attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 585–594.
Wolfe, J.M., & Horowitz, T.S. (2004). What attributes guide the
deployment of visual attention and how do they do it? Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 495–501.

(RECEIVED 6/23/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 9/23/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 4

