P SY CH OL OG I C AL S CIE N CE

Research Report

Cultural Inﬂuences on Neural
Substrates of Attentional Control
Trey Hedden,1,2 Sarah Ketay,3 Arthur Aron,3 Hazel Rose Markus,1 and John D.E. Gabrieli2
1

Stanford University, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and 3State University of New York at Stony Brook

ABSTRACT—Behavioral research has shown that people
from Western cultural contexts perform better on tasks
emphasizing independent (absolute) dimensions than on
tasks emphasizing interdependent (relative) dimensions,
whereas the reverse is true for people from East Asian
contexts. We assessed functional magnetic resonance imaging responses during performance of simple visuospatial
tasks in which participants made absolute judgments (ignoring visual context) or relative judgments (taking visual
context into account). In each group, activation in frontal
and parietal brain regions known to be associated with
attentional control was greater during culturally nonpreferred judgments than during culturally preferred
judgments. Also, within each group, activation differences
in these regions correlated strongly with scores on questionnaires measuring individual differences in culturetypical identity. Thus, the cultural background of an individual and the degree to which the individual endorses
cultural values moderate activation in brain networks
engaged during even simple visual and attentional tasks.

Social cognition research differentiates cultural contexts that
emphasize ideas and practices of interdependence (e.g., East
Asian cultures in China, Japan, and Korea) from those that
emphasize ideas and practices of independence (e.g., Western
contexts in North America and Western Europe; Markus &
Kitayama, 1991; Triandis, 1995). These cultural differences were
originally considered in terms of social relations, but subsequent research has shown that they also apply to performance of
simple perceptual judgments. People from East Asian cultural
contexts perform better on tasks with interdependent (relative or
contextual) demands than on those with independent (absolute
or context independent) demands; people from Western cultural

Address correspondence to Trey Hedden, McGovern Institute for
Brain Research, 46-4033D, 43 Vassar St., Cambridge, MA 02139,
e-mail: hedden@mit.edu.

12

contexts perform better on tasks with independent demands than
on tasks with interdependent demands (Kitayama, Duffy, Kawamura, & Larsen, 2003). These ﬁndings suggest that culture
inﬂuences perception in a fundamental way (Nisbett, Peng,
Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001). In the study reported here, we
used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine
where in the brain cultural experience alters processing of
simple perception in conditions involving independent (absolute) versus interdependent (relative) judgments. On the basis of
prior behavioral results, we expected Americans to exhibit
culturally preferred processing during absolute tasks and East
Asians to exhibit culturally preferred processing during relative
tasks. Thus, we hypothesized that cultural experience leads to
opposite effects of task conditions on brain activations in these
two groups.
A functional imaging study comparing cultural groups during culturally preferred and nonpreferred tasks might identify
no group differences in activation, but if signiﬁcant cultural
differences are found, they could take three different forms.
First, people from different cultures might exhibit activation
in different networks of brain regions. Second, people from
different cultures could exhibit activation in similar networks,
but with each group showing greater activation during those
tasks that are culturally preferred. We did not expect this pattern
because task ﬂuency or practice is typically associated with
reduced activation (Milham, Banich, Claus, & Cohen, 2003).
Third, people from different cultures could display activation in
similar networks, but with each group exhibiting greater activation for nonpreferred tasks, which would suggest greater demand for attentional control during nonpreferred tasks. Greater
activation in attentional control tasks is typically associated
with greater task difﬁculty (Braver et al., 1997). Thus, such a
pattern would seem to be most interpretable as indicating that
each group has to exert more attentional control during culturally nonpreferred than during culturally preferred tasks.
If there are cultural differences in brain function, their location may indicate whether these differences are manifest in early
perceptual or later cognitive stages of processing. If cultural
inﬂuences occur in early perceptual stages of processing, such

Copyright
r 2008at Association
for Psychological
Downloaded from
pss.sagepub.com
Bobst Library, New
York University onScience
April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 1

T. Hedden et al.

Fig. 1. Illustration of the task (a) and imaging results (b). The task consisted of judging stimuli depicting a vertical line inside a box. In the relativeinstruction condition, participants judged whether each box and line combination matched the proportional scaling of the preceding combination; in
the absolute-instruction condition, participants judged whether each line matched the previous line, regardless of the size of the accompanying box. In
each block of trials, either both instructions led to the same matching response (congruent condition) or both instructions typically led to opposing
responses (incongruent condition). The illustration in (b) shows the brain regions identiﬁed from the contrast analysis of the nonpreferred task versions
(Culture  Instruction  Congruency interaction; uncorrected threshold of p < .005, cluster size  49). The bar graphs show beta-value difference
scores (incongruent minus congruent) from representative regions of interest. Each region is identiﬁed by Brodmann’s area (BA) and Montreal
Neurological Institute coordinates. Difference scores are shown as a function of instruction (absolute vs. relative) and culture (American vs. East
Asian). Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant differences between the cultural groups, np  .05, nnp  .01.

that individuals in different cultural contexts literally see the
world in different ways, cultural differences might be observed
in primary or secondary visual areas in the occipital cortex.
Alternatively, if cultural inﬂuences occur at later processing
stages, exerting effects through selective control of attention,
cultural differences may be found in high-level association cortices, especially in regions of a frontal-parietal attentional control network (Collette, Hogge, Salmon, & van der Linden, 2006;
Wager & Smith, 2003).

METHOD

Twenty participants (ages 18–26; 11 female, 9 male), 10 East
Asians recently in the United States and 10 Americans of Western
European ancestry, underwent fMRI while making judgments
regarding line lengths. Participants from the two cultures were

Volume 19—Number 1

equated on baseline reading comprehension, t(18) 5 1.51, p 5
.15, and speed of processing, t(18) 5 0.44, p 5 .66.
The task (see Fig. 1a) was adapted from the one used by
Kitayama et al. (2003). Participants viewed a series of stimuli,
each consisting of a vertical line inside a box. In a 2  2 design,
the stimuli were judged under either relative (attending to
context) or absolute (ignoring context) instructions, and judgments were either congruent (easy) or incongruent (difﬁcult).
Speciﬁcally, in the relative-instruction version of the task, participants judged whether the box and line combination of each
stimulus matched the proportional scaling of the preceding
combination, and in the absolute-instruction version of the task,
participants judged whether the current line matched the previous line, regardless of the size of the accompanying box. A
given block of trials was either congruent, meaning that either
rule led to the same matching response, or incongruent, meaning
that the two rules typically led to opposing matching responses.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

13

Cultural Inﬂuences on Attention

In each of two sessions (separated by a 2-min rest), participants
completed three blocks in each of the four conditions. Each
block contained 5 trials, for a total of 60 trials per session.
After scanning, Americans completed an independence
questionnaire (e.g., ‘‘I am not to blame if one of my family
members fails’’; Triandis, Bontempo, Villareal, Asai, & Lucca,
1988), and East Asians completed an acculturation questionnaire
(e.g., ‘‘How well do you ﬁt when with other Asians of your same
ethnicity?’’—reverse-scored; Suinn, Ahuna, & Khoo, 1992).
Functional data were acquired with a 1.5-T General Electric
Signa MR scanner using a whole-head coil. Sequential spiral-in/
spiral-out acquisition sequences were used to measure bloodoxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD) effects (repetition time 5
1,850 ms, echo time 5 40 ms, ﬂip angle 5 701, 64  64 matrix,
ﬁeld of view 5 240 mm, twenty-three 5-mm oblique slices).
Images were screened for artifacts, motion-corrected, normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template, and
smoothed at 6 mm.
Statistical analyses were conducted using SPM2 (Wellcome
Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London) and associated
scripts. We conducted a whole-brain analysis on the three-way
interaction of culture (American vs. East Asian), instruction
(absolute vs. relative), and congruency (incongruent vs. congruent), in order to locate regions demonstrating activation differences across task and culture (whole-brain threshold of p  .05
corrected, achieved with p  .005 and cluster size  49 for
normalized, resliced voxels; Forman et al., 1995). For this analysis, we computed the instruction-by-congruency interaction for
each individual and entered the resulting contrast images into a
group-level contrast. This contrast identiﬁed (a) regions in which
Americans, compared with East Asians, exhibited greater activation on incongruent trials relative to congruent trials in the
relative-instruction condition (Americans’ nonpreferred task
version) and (b) regions in which East Asians, compared with
Americans, exhibited greater activation on incongruent relative to
congruent trials in the absolute-instruction condition (East
Asians’ nonpreferred task version). We also computed the reverse
interaction to examine regions in which activation was greater in
each culture’s preferred task version. Region-of-interest (ROI)
analyses were conducted on each functional cluster identiﬁed
from these group-level interaction contrasts.
RESULTS

Behavior
Participants were faster on congruent than on incongruent trials
(congruent: M 5 902 ms, SD 5 116; incongruent: M 5 947 ms,
SD 5 133), F(1, 18) 5 7.64, p 5 .01. They were also more
accurate, as measured by the proportion of correct trials, on
congruent than on incongruent trials (congruent: M 5 .84, SD 5
.08; incongruent: M 5 .77, SD 5 .08), F(1, 18) 5 20.39, p <
.001. There were no signiﬁcant behavioral effects involving
instruction (relative vs. absolute), which suggests that the in-

14

struction conditions were comparable in overall difﬁculty. No
effects involving culture were signiﬁcant for accuracy or reaction times, which suggests that the two groups performed similarly and engaged successfully in nonpreferred processing when
instructed to do so (and that any activation differences were not
due to behavioral differences).
Imaging
The incongruent-versus-congruent contrasts showed that both
groups exhibited widespread bilateral activations during the
culturally nonpreferred task that were greater than the activations found in the other group for the same task (i.e., the
culturally preferred version for the latter group; Culture  Instruction  Congruency interaction); these activations were
primarily concentrated in prefrontal and parietal areas known to
support sustained attentional control (Wager & Smith, 2003; see
Table 1 and Fig. 1b). There were no signiﬁcant differential activations in occipital cortex, where early visual processes are
subserved by primary and secondary visual cortices. Only two
regions were identiﬁed by the reverse interaction (i.e., group
differences during the culturally preferred task), and 11 times
more above-threshold voxels were identiﬁed in the interaction
for the nonpreferred task than in the interaction for the preferred
task (Table 1).
The incongruent-versus-congruent contrasts showed that each
group, examined separately, displayed activation in prefrontal
and parietal regions during its nonpreferred task, but little to no
above-threshold activation during its preferred task. In direct
between-groups comparisons of the two groups’ nonpreferred task
versions, no above-threshold differences in activation were observed. These analyses indicate that the groups did not differ
substantially in activations during incongruent, relative to congruent, blocks during the groups’ nonpreferred tasks.
Clusters of activation identiﬁed in the interaction analyses
were treated as ROIs, and their mean activations (beta values)
were examined in a three-way analysis of variance (ANOVA;
Culture  Instruction  Congruency) to determine the direction
of the interaction effect for each ROI (see Fig. 1b). Within each
instruction condition (absolute or relative), activation differences (incongruent minus congruent) were highly intercorrelated across the ROIs (Cronbach’s a 5 .97 for the absolute task
and .90 for the relative task). This ﬁnding indicates strong
functional coactivation and allowed us to calculate a summary
activation measure for each instruction condition. Weighted
means (weighted by cluster size) of the activation differences
were computed across the 11 ROIs identiﬁed by the contrast for
the nonpreferred task. These values were subjected to a two-way
ANOVA (Culture  Instruction), which yielded a signiﬁcant
interaction, F(1, 18) 5 26.19, p < .001.1 Americans displayed a
greater activation difference during the relative-instruction
1

Similar results were obtained using an unweighted mean of each ROI’s
maximum value, F(1, 18) 5 18.74, p < .001.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 1

T. Hedden et al.

TABLE 1
Brain Regions Showing Group Differences in Activation
Whole-brain analysis

Effect of
culture

MNI coordinates
Analysis and anatomical region Hemisphere
Nonpreferred-task interaction
Parietal, temporal lobes
Middle frontal gyrus
Middle temporal gyrus
Precentral gyrus
Inferior parietal lobule
Postcentral gyrus
Inferior parietal lobule
Superior parietal lobule
Inferior parietal lobule
Cingulate gyrus
Precentral gyrus
Composite ROI
Preferred-task interaction
Middle temporal gyrus
Anterior cingulate

L
L
R
L
R
R
L
R
L
L
R

R
M

BA
7/39
10
37
4/6/9
40
3
7/40
7
40
24/32
6

21
24/32

t value

x

y

z

32
42
46
66
52
48
44
20
44
16
48

68
52
52
6
44
24
58
60
42
2
8

22
0
0
18
50
52
42
38
42
36
24

54
0

6
30

20
26

3.55
4.79
4.91
4.36
3.67
3.75
3.58
3.76
3.86
4.07
3.60

4.75
4.06

Cluster size
(voxels)
Abs Rel
220
209
202
179
116
102
97
68
67
51
49

68
52

nn

n

nn

nn

nn

nn

nn

n

nn

nn

n

nn

nn
nn

n

nn

n

nn

nn

nn

n

nn

nn

nn

nn
nn

r value
Americans
Abs

Rel

East Asians
Abs

Rel

.33
.54
.44
.45
.57
.70n
.67n
.83n
.55
.76n
.70n
.65n

.33
.22
.20
.26
.82n
.56
.19
.75n
.63n
.48
.44
.43

.50
.48
.64n
.43
.57
.68n
.69n
.73n
.58
.24
.46
.70n

.70n
.31
.33
.18
.37
.08
.18
.63n
.57
.57
.37
.34

.30
.58

.06
.41

.42
.57

.06
.05

Note. The table shows statistics for peak voxels and surrounding regions of interest (ROIs) identiﬁed in the contrasts for the interaction of Culture  Instruction
 Congruency. Interactions were computed from group-level contrasts of the individual ﬁrst-level contrasts using the following values: absolute task, incongruent condition (AI) 5 1; absolute task, congruent condition (AC) 5 1; relative task, incongruent condition (RI) 5 1; and relative task, congruent condition
(RC) 5 1. The nonpreferred-task interaction contrast was deﬁned as East Asian > American for (AI > AC) > (RI > RC) and identiﬁed activations greater in each
culture for that culture’s nonpreferred task. The preferred-task interaction contrast was deﬁned as American > East Asian for (AI > AC) > (RI > RC) and
identiﬁed activations greater in each culture for that culture’s preferred task. Each cluster of activation from the interaction was treated as an ROI, and its mean
activation (beta value) in each of the four experimental conditions was examined. For each ROI and for the composite (weighted mean) of the 11 ROIs, the table
indicates the signiﬁcance of the simple effect of culture (t test) on the mean activation difference (incongruent minus congruent) in the absolute-instruction (Abs)
and relative-instruction (Rel) conditions (np < .05, nnp < .01). The table also presents, for each culture, the r value for the correlation between the activation
difference (incongruent minus congruent) in each task and cultural-identity scores (independence for Americans, acculturation to American culture for East
Asians). BA 5 Brodmann’s area; MNI 5 Montreal Neurological Institute; L 5 left; R 5 right; M 5 midline.

condition (M 5 0.08, SD 5 0.05) than during the absolute-instruction condition (M 5 0.06, SD 5 0.10), t(9) 5 3.56, p 5
.006; East Asians displayed the opposite pattern, that is, a
greater activation difference during the absolute-instruction
condition (M 5 0.12, SD 5 0.10) than during the relative-instruction condition (M 5 0.03, SD 5 0.04), t(9) 5 3.68, p 5
.005.
Of the 11 ROIs identiﬁed in the interaction contrast for the
nonpreferred task, 5 were centered in the frontal lobes, 5 in the
parietal lobes, and 2 in the temporal lobes (extending into the
fusiform gyrus). All 11 of these ROIs displayed a signiﬁcant
simple effect of culture in the absolute-instruction condition.
Ten showed a signiﬁcant effect of culture in the relative-instruction condition (see Table 1).
We further examined the relation of cultural context to brain
function by correlating individual scores on the cultural-identity
questionnaires with activation in a composite of the 11 ROIs
identiﬁed in the contrast for the nonpreferred task (see Table 1
and Fig. 2). For Americans, higher scores for independence
correlated signiﬁcantly with less activation in the absoluteinstruction (culturally preferred) condition (r 5 .65, p 5 .04)
and nonsigniﬁcantly with greater activation in the relative-

Volume 19—Number 1

instruction (culturally nonpreferred) condition (r 5 .43, p 5
.21). For East Asians, less acculturation to American values
correlated signiﬁcantly with greater activation in the absoluteinstruction (culturally nonpreferred) condition (r 5 .70, p 5
.03), and nonsigniﬁcantly with less activation in the relativeinstruction (culturally preferred) condition (r 5 .34, p 5 .34).2
When all items relevant to comfort or ability with English were
removed from the analysis of the acculturation questionnaire,
the analysis yielded virtually identical results; rs 5 .69 and
.34, respectively. Table 1 provides the individual ROI correlations.3 For both groups, greater afﬁliation with American
culture correlated with reduced activation in the absoluteinstruction contrast. This ﬁnding suggests that across groups,
greater afﬁliation with American culture made the absolute task
easier to process.

2
Similar correlations were obtained using an unweighted mean of each ROI’s
maximum value (Americans: .75 for the absolute task and .42 for the relative
task; East Asians: .87 for the absolute task and .29 for the relative task).
3
No signiﬁcant correlations were observed for either culture between behavioral performance and activation, or between performance and questionnaire scores.

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

15

Cultural Inﬂuences on Attention

Fig. 2. Scatter plots of the correlations between cultural-identity scores and activation differences (beta-value difference scores: incongruent minus
congruent) in the absolute-instruction task. The graph in (a) shows the correlation between activation and independence scores among Americans. The
graph in (b) shows the correlation between activation and acculturation to American culture among East Asians. Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant correlations, np  .05.

DISCUSSION

Many ideas and practices prevalent in American cultural contexts
require separating objects from their contexts and making independent or absolute judgments. In contrast, many ideas and
practices prevalent in East Asian cultural contexts require connecting objects to their contexts and making interdependent or
relative judgments (Nisbett et al., 2001). The present results provide evidence that cultural differences in the preferred and encouraged judgment style powerfully inﬂuence brain function,
completely reversing the relation between task and activation
across a widespread brain network. Individuals who had habitually
engaged in American cultural contexts exhibited greater activation
during the culturally nonpreferred relative task, whereas individuals who had habitually engaged in East Asian cultural contexts
exhibited greater activation during the culturally nonpreferred
absolute task. This interactive effect of culture and task on brain
activation was so strong that it was statistically signiﬁcant for 11
brain regions identiﬁed via a whole-brain analysis. Further, magnitudes of activation for culturally preferred and nonpreferred
tasks varied as a function of individuals’ degree of culture-typical
identity, as measured by independence for Americans and acculturation to American culture for East Asians. This convergence
between overall differences and individual differences provides
strong support for a brain-behavior relation (Kosslyn et al., 2002;
Omura, Aron, & Canli, 2005).
The results are most interpretable as reﬂecting an increased
need for sustained attentional control during tasks requiring a
processing style for which individuals are less culturally prepared. The large majority of culturally inﬂuenced activation

16

differences were in frontal and parietal regions that regularly
exhibit greater activation for more demanding tasks, and are
therefore thought to mediate cognitive control over working
memory and attention (Badre & Wagner, 2004; Smith & Jonides,
1999; Wager & Smith, 2003). Across groups, regions activated
by the culturally nonpreferred task (absolute for East Asians,
relative for Americans) were substantially similar, with no
above-threshold voxels differing between groups. This suggests
that the same attentional control network is engaged by individuals in the two cultural contexts, but that the need for such
attentional control in a given condition is moderated by what
individuals have been prepared for by their particular cultural
contexts.
The ﬁndings also suggest that cultural inﬂuences on brain
functions engaged by these tasks occur primarily during latestage attentional processing, rather than early-stage perceptual
processing. Culturally inﬂuenced activations were found in
higher-order cortices (frontal, parietal, temporal) associated
with cognitive control, attention, and working memory. There
were no cultural inﬂuences on primary or secondary areas of the
occipital cortex associated with early-stage perceptual processing. Culturally moderated activations were observed in the
fusiform gyrus, a region that is associated with late-stage identiﬁcation of visual objects and whose activation is modulated by
attention (Gazzaley, Cooney, McEvoy, Knight, & D’Esposito,
2005; Yi, Kelley, Marois, & Chun, 2006). Our study focused on
incongruent versus congruent stimuli; nevertheless, when cultural differences between the absolute-instruction and relativeinstruction conditions were examined independently of congruency, above-threshold activations were still not observed in

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 1

T. Hedden et al.

visual regions associated with early-stage processing. Other
tasks might identify cultural inﬂuences on primary or secondary
perceptual cortices, but in the current study, even a relatively
simple stimulus evoked cultural differences only in higher-order
associative or tertiary cortices.
The lack of signiﬁcant group differences in behavioral responses may reﬂect lack of power or sensitivity in the behavioral
measures. Prior ﬁndings of a behavioral difference on a similar task (Kitayama et al., 2003) may have been due to the use
of a more demanding procedure (reproducing line drawings)
measured with absolute error. Our procedure involved simple
recognition over seconds, and match/nonmatch judgments.
Notably, the lack of behavioral differences between cultures
suggests that the observed cultural differences in brain activation cannot be ascribed to time spent on task, error monitoring,
or other behavioral effects of difﬁculty. Rather, the best explanation for members of the two cultures exhibiting increased
activation in opposite task conditions is that each culture exhibits a preferred processing mode (relative for East Asians,
absolute for Americans). Thus, the opposing mode is cognitively
more demanding, but equivalent performance can be achieved
when instructions are explicit and relevant brain regions are
more intensively recruited.
We observed striking cultural modulation of brain responses
during simple visual tasks that involved culturally preferred and
nonpreferred processing modes. These ﬁndings complement
those of behavioral studies and provide important and novel
neurobiological insights into cultural differences. First, the
same neural systems were recruited by people from the two
cultures. This ﬁnding supports the view that the same kinds
of cognitive processes are invoked across cultures, albeit to
different magnitudes according to the relation between task
demands and cultural preferences. Second, the localization of
cultural interactions to frontal-parietal regions, rather than to
early visual regions, suggests that the processes most affected by
cultural experience are primarily related to high-level attentional modulation mediated by association cortices, rather than
to early-stage encoding of inputs mediated by primary perceptual cortices. Third, the relation between neural activation and
cultural-afﬁliation scores suggests that individual differences in
engagement with the ideas and practices of a given cultural
context inﬂuence the extent to which individuals are able to
ﬂuently process task versions favored by that culture. In summary, these ﬁndings show how experience in and identiﬁcation
with a cultural context may shape brain responses associated
with attentional control even during a relatively simple and
abstract task.
Acknowledgments—We thank Susan Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli and
Shay Mozes for their advice on data analysis. This work was
funded by the National Institutes of Health and supported by the
McGovern Institute for Brain Research at MIT.

Volume 19—Number 1

REFERENCES
Badre, D., & Wagner, A.D. (2004). Selection, integration, and conﬂict
monitoring: Assessing the nature and generality of prefrontal
cognitive control mechanisms. Neuron, 41, 473–487.
Braver, T.S., Cohen, J.D., Nystrom, L.E., Jonides, J., Smith, E.E., &
Noll, D.C. (1997). A parametric study of prefrontal cortex involvement in human working memory. NeuroImage, 5, 49–62.
Collette, F., Hogge, M., Salmon, E., & van der Linden, M. (2006).
Exploration of the neural substrates of executive functioning by
functional neuroimaging. Neuroscience, 139, 209–221.
Forman, S.D., Cohen, J.D., Fitzgerald, M., Eddy, W.F., Mintun, M.A., &
Noll, D.C. (1995). Improved assessment of signiﬁcant activation in
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): Use of a clustersize threshold. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 33, 636–647.
Gazzaley, A., Cooney, J.W., McEvoy, K., Knight, R.T., & D’Esposito, M.
(2005). Top-down enhancement and suppression of the magnitude and speed of neural activity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 507–517.
Kitayama, S., Duffy, S., Kawamura, T., & Larsen, J.T. (2003). Perceiving an object and its context in different cultures: A cultural
look at New Look. Psychological Science, 14, 201–206.
Kosslyn, S.M., Cacioppo, J.T., Davidson, R.J., Hugdahl, K., Lovallo,
W.R., Spiegel, D., & Rose, R. (2002). Bridging psychology and
biology: The analysis of individuals in groups. American Psychologist, 57, 341–351.
Markus, H., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications
for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98,
224–253.
Milham, M.P., Banich, M.T., Claus, E.D., & Cohen, N.J. (2003).
Practice-related effects demonstrate complementary roles of anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortices in attentional control.
NeuroImage, 18, 483–493.
Nisbett, R.E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001). Culture and
systems of thought: Holistic versus analytic cognition. Psychological Review, 108, 291–310.
Omura, K., Aron, A., & Canli, T. (2005). Variance maps as a novel tool
for localizing regions of interest in imaging studies of individual
differences. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 5,
252–261.
Smith, E.E., & Jonides, J. (1999). Storage and executive processes in
the frontal lobes. Science, 283, 1657–1661.
Suinn, R.M., Ahuna, C., & Khoo, G. (1992). The Suinn-Lew Asian SelfIdentity Acculturation Scale: Concurrent and factorial validation.
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 52, 1041–1046.
Triandis, H.C. (1995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Triandis, H.C., Bontempo, R., Villareal, M.J., Asai, M., & Lucca, N.
(1988). Individualism and collectivism: Cross-cultural perspectives on self-ingroup relationships. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 54, 323–338.
Wager, T.D., & Smith, E.E. (2003). Neuroimaging studies of working
memory: A meta-analysis. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral
Neuroscience, 3, 255–274.
Yi, D.J., Kelley, T.A., Marois, R., & Chun, M.M. (2006). Attentional
modulation of repetition attenuation is anatomically dissociable
for scenes and faces. Brain Research, 1080, 53–62.

(RECEIVED 1/9/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 7/27/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

17

