PS YC HOLOGICA L SC IENCE

Research Report

Implicit Prejudice Toward
Injecting Drug Users Predicts
Intentions to Change Jobs Among
Drug and Alcohol Nurses
William von Hippel,1 Loren Brener,2 and Courtney von Hippel1
1

University of Queensland and 2University of New South Wales

ABSTRACT—The

meaning and importance of implicit prejudice is a source of considerable debate. One way to advance this debate is to assess whether implicit prejudice
can predict independent variance, beyond that predicted
by explicit prejudice, in meaningful and unambiguous behaviors or behavioral intentions. In the current research,
drug and alcohol nurses reported their level of stress working with injecting drug users, their job satisfaction, their
explicit prejudice toward injecting drug users, and their
intentions to leave drug and alcohol nursing. The nurses
also completed the Single Category Implicit Association
Test, which measured their implicit prejudice toward injecting drug users. Analyses revealed that implicit prejudice was a signiﬁcant mediator, beyond explicit prejudice
and job satisfaction, of the relation between job stress and
intention to change jobs.

The advent of techniques that enable researchers to measure
implicit (or unconscious) attitudes has led to an explosion of
research and theory across nearly all the subdisciplines of psychology. Research in social psychology (Richeson & Shelton,
2003), clinical psychology (Teachman & Woody, 2003), consumer
psychology (Maison, Greenwald, & Bruin, 2004), organizational psychology (von Hippel, 2006), and cognitive neuroscience
(Cunningham et al., 2004) has relied on measures of implicit
attitudes to examine issues that were difﬁcult to address with
traditional measures of attitudes. The area that has seen the most

Address correspondence to William von Hippel, School of Psychology, University of Queensland, St. Lucia 4072, Australia, e-mail:
billvh@psy.uq.edu.au.

Volume 19—Number 1

activity is implicit prejudice,1 because people are often unwilling or unable to report their prejudicial feelings (Dovidio &
Gaertner, 1998), and implicit measures allow researchers to
circumvent problems associated with self-report.
Despite (or perhaps because of) this burgeoning research
literature, there remains substantial controversy over whether
implicit-prejudice measures really tap prejudicial feelings. In
large part, this controversy has centered on whether implicitprejudice measures can predict independent variance in behavior that is consequential and unambiguous (Arkes & Tetlock,
2004). Indeed, this controversy has even moved into law and
human resources, where proponents and opponents of the construct of implicit prejudice debate its applicability to equalemployment-opportunity practices (Greenwald & Krieger,
2006; Kang & Banaji, 2006; Mitchell & Tetlock, in press;
Tetlock & Mitchell, in press).
At the moment, this debate appears to have reached an impasse, as proponents of implicit measures argue that they predict a number of important behavioral outcomes, whereas
skeptics argue that these behavioral outcomes are themselves
ambiguous. For example, a number of studies show that implicit
prejudice predicts nonverbal distancing (e.g., minimal eye contact; for a meta-analysis, see Poehlman, Uhlmann, Greenwald,
& Banaji, 2007), but nonverbal distancing could be a sign of
animosity, distaste, nervousness, unfamiliarity, or even concern
that one might be regarded as prejudiced (Arkes & Tetlock,
1
We use the term implicit prejudice to refer to implicit attitudes toward
members of different groups. Although prejudice is typically conceived as a
negative attitude, at this point one can only assess an individual’s relative
position on the continuum from positive to negative implicit attitudes, as the
psychometrics of implicit measures are insufﬁciently established to allow
identiﬁcation of a particular individual as implicitly prejudiced (Blanton &
Jaccard, 2006).

Copyright
r 2008 Association
for Psychological
Science
Downloaded
from pss.sagepub.com
at Bobst Library,
New York University
on April 19, 2016

7

Implicit Prejudice and Job Turnover

2004; Tetlock & Arkes, 2004). Many other behaviors have been
predicted by implicit-prejudice measures, but in all cases this
basic concern applies (see Arkes & Tetlock, 2004; Tetlock &
Mitchell, in press). Thus, one way to move this debate forward
would be to assess whether implicit prejudice can predict independent variance—beyond that explained by explicit prejudice—in meaningful and unambiguous behaviors or behavioral
intentions.
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF IMPLICIT PREJUDICE

Because prejudiced thoughts conﬂict with universally held
egalitarian beliefs, people are typically unwilling to acknowledge their own prejudices, and are thought to push them into
unconsciousness (Dovidio & Gaertner, 1998). For this reason,
implicit and explicit prejudice should frequently be dissociated,
and this is often the case (Poehlman et al., 2007). As a consequence, prejudice is a domain in which implicit attitudes are
(theoretically) likely to predict independent variance in behavior, and indeed implicit-prejudice measures have been
found to predict behavior better than explicit-prejudice measures do (Poehlman et al., 2007). Again, however, there is
controversy about the meaning of the behaviors examined in this
research (Arkes & Tetlock, 2004; Tetlock & Mitchell, in press).
In the research reported in this article, we extended previous
research by examining whether implicit prejudice can predict
unambiguous and important behavioral intentions that theoretically and logically follow from prejudicial feelings. We did so by
assessing whether implicit and explicit prejudice toward injecting drug users (IDUs) can predict drug and alcohol (D&A)
nurses’ intentions to leave D&A nursing. Although intention to
change jobs is not an actual behavior, it served as our primary
dependent measure for two reasons. First, responses to the
speciﬁc question regarding intentions to change jobs remain the
best predictor of voluntary job turnover (van Breukelen, van der
List, & Steensma, 2004). Second, intentions to change jobs have
an advantage over actual turnover in that they are less inﬂuenced by environmental factors such as the availability of alternative employment (Gerhart, 1990).
D&A nurses provide a prototypical case of modern prejudice.
On the one hand, IDUs can be challenging clients (e.g., Sylvestre, Litwin, Clements, & Gourevitch, 2005), and medical
contact with them might sometimes reinforce stereotypes that
this group is chaotic and unmanageable. On the other hand,
medical models of drug use as a disease promote sympathy for
IDUs. Such feelings of sympathy might be particularly widespread among D&A nurses, who have chosen to focus their careers on helping people with D&A problems. Thus, D&A nurses
might be particularly likely to have negative implicit attitudes
that are not mirrored by their explicit feelings.
This logic suggests that implicit attitudes among D&A nurses
might independently predict burnout and turnover, which are
prevalent problems in this subﬁeld of medical care (Duraising-

8

am, Pidd, Roche, & O’Connor, 2006; Gallon, Gabriel, &
Knudsen, 2003). That is, D&A staff might continue to believe
explicitly that IDUs are worthy of care and sympathy, but might
nevertheless harbor negative implicit attitudes toward these
clients that could eventually induce them to leave D&A nursing.
Accordingly, we propose the following model: First, challenging
behaviors on the part of IDU clients will lead to feelings of job
stress among D&A nurses. Second, stress, in turn, will predict
the nurses’ intentions to leave D&A nursing. Third, the effect of
stress on intentions to change jobs will be mediated by implicit
prejudice toward IDUs, and this effect will be independent of the
effect of stress on explicit prejudice and job attitudes. The goal
of the current research was to test this model. We emphasized the
mediating role of implicit prejudice, as the other components of
the model are supported by previous research (e.g., Blegen,
1993; Borda & Norman, 1997; Bourbonnais, Comeau, Vézina, &
Guylaine, 1998; Duraisingam et al., 2006).

METHOD

Participants
Forty-four D&A nurses in the Sydney metropolitan area participated in this experiment in return for a gift voucher of 25
Australian dollars (  $20 U.S.). Nurses were recruited from
D&A treatment facilities, needle and syringe exchange programs, and primary-care facilities that cater to IDUs.

Materials and Procedure
The nurses completed the various scales and tasks on a laptop
computer. First, they completed a 9-item scale measuring
prejudice toward IDUs (e.g., ‘‘People should feel sympathetic
and understanding of injecting drug users’’; positive items were
reverse-scored; Brener & von Hippel, in press).2 Next, they
completed a 4-item abbreviated measure of job satisfaction (e.g.,
‘‘I feel satisﬁed with my present job’’; Brayﬁeld & Rothe, 1951)
and then responded to a single item assessing intentions to
change jobs (‘‘During the next year, I will probably look for a new
job in another area of nursing’’; Price & Mueller, 1986). Responses to the prejudice, job-satisfaction, and job-intentions
items were provided on 5-point scales, anchored by strongly
disagree and strongly agree.
Participants then completed a 12-item challenging-behaviors
scale assessing the frequency with which their IDU clients exhibited a variety of negative behaviors (e.g., verbal abuse or
stealing) and positive behaviors (e.g., appreciation or following
their treatment regimen) during treatment (positive items were
reverse-scored). Answers to these questions were provided on 4point scales, with the verbal labels of never, rarely, sometimes,
2
This measure of explicit prejudice is well suited for the current research, as
it predicts discriminatory treatment of IDU clients by health care workers
(Brener, von Hippel, Kippax, & Preacher, 2007).

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 1

William von Hippel, Loren Brener, and Courtney von Hippel

and often. The nurses then responded to 2 items indicating how
frequently they were stressed by their experiences working with
IDU clients (‘‘Working with injecting drug users is really a strain
for me,’’ ‘‘Working with injecting drug users directly puts too
much stress on me’’). Answers to these questions were provided
on a 6-point scale ranging from never to every day.
After ﬁnishing these self-report items, participants completed
the Single Category Implicit Association Test (SC-IAT; Karpinski & Steinman, 2007), which measured implicit attitudes
toward IDUs. The SC-IAT is a timed procedure adapted from the
Implicit Association Test (Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz,
1998). Participants ﬁrst used one key on a computer keyboard
to respond both to words referring to positive attributes and to
words referring to IDUs and used a different key to respond to
words referring to negative attributes, and then this pattern was
reversed so that one key was used to respond to negative attributes and to IDUs and the other key was used to respond to
positive attributes. In this procedure, implicit attitudes are assessed as the relative ease (i.e., speed) with which positive
versus negative attributes (e.g., wonderful vs. awful) are paired
with the attitude concept (in this case, IDUs, as represented by
terms such as heroin injector, speed injector, and cocaine injector).
Terms for IDUs were paired with positive attributes in the ﬁrst
block of 72 trials and with negative attributes in the second
block of 72 trials, and participants completed 25 practice trials
prior to each set of 72 critical trials. The SC-IAT has an advantage over the IAT in studies such as this one, in that there is
no category that contrasts clearly with IDUs. Finally, the nurses
indicated how many hours they had worked with IDUs in the past
week.
RESULTS

The two self-report stress items were highly correlated (r 5 .82,
p < .001), so they were collapsed into a single measure. Likewise, the reliabilities of the challenging-behaviors scale (a 5
.74), the job-satisfaction scale (a 5 .83), and the prejudicetoward-IDUs scale (a 5 .83) were adequate. Finally, the SC-IAT
was scored by subtracting the response times when IDUs were
paired with negative attributes from the response times when
IDUs were paired with positive attributes, and this difference
score was divided by the standard deviation of the response
times (after eliminating error trials and trials with very slow and
fast responses, as in Karpinski & Steinman, 2007).3 Reliability
of the SC-IAT was computed (as in Karpinski & Steinman, 2007)
using the Spearman-Brown correction, which revealed adequate
reliability (radjusted 5 .74). Higher SC-IAT scores indicate
3

To ensure that these data-preparation procedures were not responsible for
any of the results, we also conducted all of the analyses using the original SCIAT response times, without removing excessively fast or slow trials and without
removing incorrect responses. These ‘‘raw’’ SC-IAT scores were correlated (r 5
.96) with the ‘‘corrected’’ scores, and all analyses with the corrected measure
remained signiﬁcant when this raw measure was used instead.

Volume 19—Number 1

TABLE 1
Descriptive Statistics
Variable
Frequency of challenging
behaviors
Self-reported stress
Job satisfaction
Explicit prejudice
Implicit prejudice
Hours worked with injecting
drug users
Intention to change jobs

Minimum

Maximum

Mean

SD

1.50
1.00
1.50
1.00
0.74

2.83
4.00
5.00
3.44
1.12

2.26
2.08
3.78
2.16
0.26

0.32
0.77
0.75
0.60
0.41

1
1.00

40
5.00

20.61
2.45

12.08
1.23

greater implicit prejudice toward IDUs, and the SC-IAT score
can be considered a measure of effect size as it is in standarddeviation units (see Table 1 for descriptive statistics for all
variables). As Table 1 shows, SC-IAT scores were greater than
zero, t(42) 5 4.16, p < .001, although whether this ﬁnding indicates that the nurses on average exhibited implicit prejudice
toward IDUs is unclear, as the zero point may or may not reﬂect
the cutoff between prejudiced and nonprejudiced responses
(Blanton & Jaccard, 2006).
We computed bivariate correlations between all of the variables (see Table 2) and then estimated a regression-based causal
model (see Fig. 1). The model included number of hours worked
with IDUs as a control variable, although it did not have a discernible effect on any of the relationships. As Figure 1 shows,
challenging behaviors by IDUs predicted self-reported stress of
nurses working with these clients. Stress, in turn, predicted
intention to change jobs. This relation between stress and intention to change jobs was signiﬁcantly mediated by implicit
prejudice (indirect effect 5 .175, SE 5 .098, 95% conﬁdence interval: .053, .490) but not by explicit prejudice (indirect
effect 5 .013, SE 5 .218, 95% conﬁdence interval: .355,
.520) or job satisfaction (indirect effect 5 .258, SE 5 .192, 95%
conﬁdence interval: .087, .686).4 Furthermore, with the mediators in the model, the direct effect of stress on intention to
change jobs was no longer signiﬁcant (see Fig. 1).
To further establish the validity of the model presented in
Figure 1, we explored various competing models. First, when job
satisfaction was removed from the model, implicit prejudice
remained a signiﬁcant mediator, and the direct effect of stress on
intention to change jobs remained nonsigniﬁcant (b 5 .27, p >
.10). In contrast, when implicit prejudice was removed from the
model and job satisfaction left in, the direct effect of stress on
intention to change jobs was signiﬁcant (b 5 .37, p < .05). In
neither of these alternative models was explicit prejudice a
signiﬁcant predictor of intention to change jobs. Next, when the
model was rearranged, and either stress or implicit prejudice
4
To obtain accurate conﬁdence limits, we computed indirect effects from
unstandardized regression weights with 10,000 bootstrap resamples, following
the syntax provided by Preacher and Hayes (2007).

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

9

Implicit Prejudice and Job Turnover

TABLE 2
Correlations Between Measures
Frequency of
challenging
behaviors

Variable

.44nn
.19
.13
.17
.32n
.16

Self-reported stress
Job satisfaction
Explicit prejudice
Implicit prejudice
Hours worked with IDUs
Intention to change jobs

Self-reported
stress
.45nn
.60nnn
.40nn
.14
.51nn

Job
satisfaction

.59nnn
.33n
.24
.53nnn

Explicit
prejudice

Implicit
prejudice

Hours worked
with IDUs

.26
.13
.45nn

.01
.51nn

.04

Note. IDUs 5 injecting drug users.
n
p < .05. nnp < .01. nnnp < .001.

was treated as the criterion variable, none of the possible mediational models were signiﬁcant. Next, we calculated the partial
correlation between implicit prejudice and intention to change
jobs while controlling for explicit prejudice; this analysis revealed that implicit prejudice predicted independent variance
in intention to change jobs (pr 5 45, p < .01). Finally, to ensure
that outliers were not responsible for the relation between implicit prejudice and intention to change jobs, we calculated a
series of correlations and partial correlations (controlling for
explicit prejudice) between implicit prejudice and intention to
change jobs after removing the three lowest and three highest
values on the SC-IAT one at a time, beginning with the most

extreme values, and after removing the single person who responded ‘‘strongly agree’’ to the item assessing intention to
change jobs. These correlations and partial correlations ﬂuctuated slightly up and down with removal of the various scores,
but were all signiﬁcant.
DISCUSSION

The results of the current study have direct bearing on the debate concerning the meaning of implicit prejudice (and implicit
attitudes more generally). In the current research, D&A nurses
reported more frequent experiences of stress if they experienced

Fig. 1. The mediated effect of stress on intention to change jobs among drug and alcohol (D&A)
nurses. Path coefﬁcients represent standardized regression weights. Stress was measured as the
stress the nurses experienced working with injecting drug users (IDUs) as clients. The coefﬁcient
above the path from self-reported stress to intention to quit D&A nursing represents the direct effect
with no mediators in the model; the coefﬁcient below this path represents the direct effect when the
mediators are included in the model. Coefﬁcients signiﬁcantly different from zero are indicated by
asterisks, np < .05, nnp < .01, nnnp < .001.

10

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

Volume 19—Number 1

William von Hippel, Loren Brener, and Courtney von Hippel

a greater frequency of challenging behaviors from their IDU
clients. These experiences of stress, in turn, were predictive of
intentions to change jobs, with nurses who reported greater
stress also reporting a greater intention to leave D&A nursing for
another area of nursing in the upcoming year. Most important,
the relation between experiences of stress and intentions to quit
D&A nursing was mediated by implicit prejudice, but not by explicit prejudice. Indeed, in this study, implicit prejudice played a
clearer role than job satisfaction in mediating the relation between
stress and intention to change jobs. Thus, the current results
provide the clearest evidence to date that implicit attitudes predict
independent variance—beyond that predicted by explicit attitudes—in a behavioral intention that is both important and
unambiguous in meaning. In so doing, the current results demonstrate that implicit attitudes can independently motivate important, life-changing behaviors. It remains for future research to
assess whether these results generalize to domains that do not
involve such a potent mix of sympathy and challenging behavior.
Acknowledgments—This research was funded by grants from
the Australian Research Council.
REFERENCES
Arkes, H., & Tetlock, P.E. (2004). Attributions of implicit prejudice, or
‘‘Would Jesse Jackson ‘fail’ the Implicit Association Test?’’ Psychological Inquiry, 15, 257–278.
Blanton, H., & Jaccard, J. (2006). Arbitrary metrics in psychology.
American Psychologist, 61, 27–41.
Blegen, M.A. (1993). Nurses’ job satisfaction: A meta-analysis of related variables. Nursing Research, 42, 36–41.
Borda, R.G., & Norman, I.J. (1997). Factors inﬂuencing turnover and
absence of nurses: A research review. International Journal of
Nursing Studies, 34, 385–394.
Bourbonnais, R., Comeau, M., Vézina, M., & Guylaine, D. (1998). Job
strain, psychological distress, and burnout in nurses. American
Journal of Industrial Medicine, 34, 20–28.
Brayﬁeld, A.H., & Rothe, H.F. (1951). An index of job satisfaction.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 35, 307–311.
Brener, L., & von Hippel, W. (in press). Measuring attitudes towards injecting drug users and hepatitis C. Substance Use and
Misuse.
Brener, L., von Hippel, W., Kippax, S., & Preacher, K.J. (2007).
Prejudice and discrimination in the health care of people with
hepatitis C. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Cunningham, W.A., Johnson, M.K., Raye, C.L., Gatenby, J.C., Gore, J.C.,
& Banaji, M.R. (2004). Separable neural components in the processing of Black and White faces. Psychological Science, 15,
806–813.
Dovidio, J.F., & Gaertner, S.L. (1998). On the nature of contemporary
prejudice: The causes, consequences, and challenges of aversive
racism. In J.L. Eberhardt & S.T. Fiske (Eds.), Confronting racism:
The problem and the response (pp. 3–32). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Duraisingam, V., Pidd, K., Roche, A.M., & O’Connor, J. (2006).
Stress, satisfaction and retention among alcohol and other drug

Volume 19—Number 1

workers in Australia. Adelaide, Australia: Flinders University,
National Centre for Education and Training on Addiction.
Gallon, S.L., Gabriel, R.M., & Knudsen, J.R.W. (2003). The toughest job
you’ll ever love: A Paciﬁc Northwest treatment workforce survey.
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 24, 183–196.
Gerhart, B. (1990). Voluntary turnover and alternative job opportunities. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 75, 467–476.
Greenwald, A.G., & Krieger, L.H. (2006). Implicit bias: Scientiﬁc
foundations. California Law Review, 94, 945–967.
Greenwald, A.G., McGhee, D.E., & Schwartz, J.K.L. (1998). Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition: The Implicit
Association Test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
74, 1464–1480.
Kang, J., & Banaji, M.R. (2006). Fair measures: A behavioral realist
revision of ‘‘afﬁrmative action.’’ California Law Review, 94, 1063–
1118.
Karpinski, A., & Steinman, R.B. (2007). The Single Category Implicit
Association Test as a measure of implicit social cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 16–32.
Maison, D., Greenwald, A.G., & Bruin, R.H. (2004). Predictive validity of the Implicit Association Test in studies of brands, consumer attitudes and behavior. Journal of Consumer Psychology,
14, 405–415.
Mitchell, P.G., & Tetlock, P.E. (in press). Anti-discrimination law
and the perils of mind reading. The Ohio State University Law
Review.
Poehlman, T.A., Uhlmann, E., Greenwald, A.G., & Banaji, M.R.
(2007). Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: III.
Meta-analysis of predictive validity. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Preacher, K.J., & Hayes, A.F. (2007). Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in simple and
multiple mediator models. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Price, J.L., & Mueller, C.W. (1986). Handbook of organizational measurement. Marshﬁeld, MA: Pitman.
Richeson, J.A., & Shelton, J.N. (2003). When prejudice doesn’t pay:
Effects of interracial contact on executive function. Psychological
Science, 14, 287–290.
Sylvestre, D.L., Litwin, A.H., Clements, B.J., & Gourevitch, M.N.
(2005). The impact of barriers to hepatitis C virus treatment in
recovering heroin users maintained on methadone. Journal of
Substance Abuse Treatment, 29, 159–165.
Teachman, B., & Woody, S. (2003). Automatic processing in spider
phobia: Implicit fear associations over the course of treatment.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 112, 100–109.
Tetlock, P.E., & Arkes, H. (2004). The implicit-prejudice exchange:
Islands of consensus in a sea of controversy. Psychological Inquiry, 15, 311–321.
Tetlock, P.E., & Mitchell, G. (in press). Unconscious prejudice and
accountability systems: What must organizations do to check implicit bias? Research in Organizational Behavior.
van Breukelen, W., van der List, R., & Steensma, H. (2004). Voluntary
employee turnover: Combining variables from the ‘traditional’
turnover literature with the theory of planned behavior. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 25, 893–914.
von Hippel, C. (2006). When people would rather switch than ﬁght:
Out-group favoritism among temporary employees. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 9, 533–546.

(RECEIVED 5/13/07; REVISION ACCEPTED 8/7/07)

Downloaded from pss.sagepub.com at Bobst Library, New York University on April 19, 2016

11

