PERSONALITY PROCESSES AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES

Are Individuals’ Reputations Related to Their History of Behavior?
Cameron Anderson and Aiwa Shirako
University of California, Berkeley
Functional theories of reputation imply that individuals’ reputations are tied to their history of behavior.
However, indirect evidence suggests that the relation between reputation and behavior might be tenuous
at best. In 3 studies, the authors tracked the development of reputations among individuals who engaged
in multiple negotiation tasks across several weeks. The authors found that on average, individuals’
reputations were only mildly related to their history of behavior. However, the link between reputation
and behavior was stronger for some individuals than others––specifically, for individuals who were more
well-known and received more social attention in the community. In contrast, for less well-known
individuals, their behavior had little impact on their reputation. The findings have implications for
psychologists’ understanding of reputations, person perceptions in larger groups, and the costs and
benefits of social visibility.
Keywords: reputation, social connectedness, person perception, perceptual accuracy, negotiation

about one of its members (Bromley, 1993; Craik, 2007; Emler,
1990). In a typical community, it is difficult to pay attention to the
behavior of all individuals (Byrne & Whiten, 1988), and people
attend only selectively to information about others (e.g., Chance,
1967). Further, information gets distorted as it is passed from one
person to another (Gilovich, 1987). As Allport (1937) suggested
long ago, individuals’ reputations might be based more on gossip
and rumor than on their history of behavior.
We argue that somewhere between these two opposing
perspectives––that reputations reflect individuals’ history of behavior and that reputations are inaccurate and invalid—lies the
truth. Reputations should be linked to behavior, albeit not strongly
for the average individual because of limitations in community
members’ attention. However, the link should be stronger for some
individuals than others; namely, for more prominent individuals
who receive more attention in their community. We tested these
ideas in three studies, examining the development of reputations
among individuals who engaged in a series of negotiation tasks
across several weeks.
Understanding the link between behavior and reputation is important for a number of reasons. First, if reputations are a mechanism of social control (Emler, 1990; Fehr & Gächter, 2002;
Granovetter, 1985), a critical issue is their efficacy. How well do
reputations reward the virtuous and punish the deceitful? Second,
people often rely on reputation information when selecting business associates, friends, or romantic partners (Granovetter, 1985;
Tinsley, O’Connor, & Sullivan, 2002), so it is important to know
whether such information tends to be valid or baseless. Finally,
how individuals are perceived in a community determines their
self-concept (Cooley, 1902; Leary, Tambor, Terdal, & Downs,
1995), social standing (Berger, Cohen, & Zelditch, 1972; Hardy &
Van Vugt, 2006), and material outcomes (Fehr & Gächter, 2002;

Reputations are thought to serve a number of social functions.
Possessing information about others helps us avoid individuals
who might cheat or deceive us and pursue relationships with those
who are more cooperative and trustworthy (Bromley, 1993; Dunbar, 2004; Granovetter, 1985; Hogan, 1996). Reputations also help
promote prosocial behavior. Positive reputations bring status, acceptance, and willing exchange partners, whereas negative reputations incur collective punishment and ostracism (Blau, 1964;
Fehr & Gächter, 2002; Flynn, 2003; Hardy & Van Vugt, 2006;
Homans, 1951; Nowak & Sigmund, 1998; Tetlock, 2002; Thibault
& Kelley, 1959), so reputations can incentivize individuals to
behave more cooperatively.
Functionalist accounts of reputation assume that there are links
between individuals’ reputations and their history of behavior.
Individuals who have historically behaved in cooperative or trustworthy ways should be perceived more positively in their community than those who have behaved in selfish or deceptive ways.
Without such links, reputations would fail to serve their putative
functions. They would lead us to trust those we should avoid and
avoid those we should trust, for example.
But are individuals’ reputations closely tied to their behavior?
Some findings suggest they are not. A reputation is defined as the
set of beliefs, perceptions, and evaluations a community forms

Cameron Anderson and Aiwa Shirako, Walter A. Haas School of
Business, University of California, Berkeley.
We are grateful to Francis Flynn and Philip Tetlock for their thoughtful
comments on a draft of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Cameron
Anderson, Walter A. Haas School of Business, University of California,
Berkeley, 545 Student Services Building #1900, Berkeley, CA 947201900. E-mail: anderson@haas.berkeley.edu

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2008, Vol. 94, No. 2, 320 –333
Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association 0022-3514/08/$12.00
DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.2.320

320

BEHAVIOR AND REPUTATION

Granovetter, 1985). It is crucial to understand the origins of a
variable with such profound psychological, social, and material
significance.

Conceptualizing Reputation
It is important to provide conceptual clarity to the term reputation because common use of the word can carry unnecessary
connotations. For example, reputation often refers specifically to
an individual’s integrity or virtuousness; saying someone has a
“good reputation” often means he or she is known to be trustworthy and ethical. However, reputations can be multifaceted. A
person can be evaluated by fellow community members along
many dimensions, such as for their industriousness, warmth, or
creativity. Also, the content of reputations can involve more than
judgments about personal qualities (Craik, 2007; Emler, 1990),
such as specific facts (e.g., place of birth), actions (e.g., “He told
the most inappropriate story at a wedding”), roles (e.g., “She is the
new boss”), or relationship status (e.g. “He is still single”).
Moreover, when people say that a person has a reputation, they
imply that perceptions of the person are widespread or shared
among most if not all members of a community (Bromley, 1993).
Yet this is not always the case. Previous research suggests that
sometimes even the most widely shared attributions of an individual are held only by a portion of the community (Bromley, 1993).
At the same time however, a single impression one person forms
of another cannot be deemed a reputation; rather, single impressions serve as building blocks of an overall reputation (Bromley,
1993; Craik, 2007; Emler, 1990). Therefore, we consider an individual to have a reputation when multiple community members
(but not necessarily all) share the same perception or belief about
him or her. The more people share the same belief or perception of
an individual, the stronger is that individual’s reputation.
In this sense, reputations are similar to the public component of
personality (Hogan, 1983, 1996), the “public self” (e.g., Baumeister, 1982b; Goffman, 1959), or what Kenny (1994) called “target
effects”––all of which reflect how an individual is perceived by
others. We would argue that reputations reflect how individuals are
perceived in the specific context of a particular community, such
as a work organization, neighborhood, or religious community.

The Link Between Behavior and Reputation
An intuitive model of reputation formation would be that when
individuals interact with multiple community members over time,
they leave a trail of interaction partners who have formed perceptions of them. These interaction partners’ perceptions comprise
what can be called the individual’s firsthand reputation (‘firsthand’ because the perceptions were based on direct, firsthand
experience). These interaction partners might then tell others about
the individual, such as friends or colleagues, and those friends or
colleagues might in turn tell others about the individual. The
perceptions formed by these receivers of secondhand information
comprise what can be called the individual’s secondhand reputation.
There are many obstacles that might preclude even firsthand
reputations from forming. Classic and current research has shown
that individuals can behave differently across different situations;
for example, they can behave cooperatively in one interaction but

321

deceptively in another (Fleeson, 2001; Hartshorne & May, 1928;
Mischel, 1968). This inconsistency might preclude individuals
from accumulating any kind of coherent or systematic reputation
across their interaction partners (Bromley, 1993). Each person
with whom individuals interact might form a different perception
of them, some perceiving them as trustworthy and others seeing
them as deceptive.
Further, within communities it can become difficult to impossible for individuals to keep track of all fellow community members’ behavior (Byrne & Whiten, 1988). Humans are cognitive
misers (Taylor, 1998), and maintaining a mental account of others’
behavior is extremely taxing (Byrne & Whiten, 1988). Much
evidence suggests that individuals attend to some individuals more
than others (e.g., Chance, 1967; Fiske, 1993) and that memories of
individuals fade easily and change over time, even after 1 week
(Hastie & Kumar, 1979; Snyder & Uranowitz, 1978; Stangor &
McMillan, 1992). This suggests that, over time, people are unlikely to retain the perceptions they made of all their interaction
partners. Yet if individuals are easily and quickly forgotten, then a
coherent firsthand reputation is unlikely to accumulate. Only a
small number of people at a given time would perceive an individual as cooperative or as selfish, for example.
In terms of secondhand reputations, individuals’ interaction
partners might not find their perception of an individual important
or interesting enough to pass on to others (Emler, 1990). And those
who receive secondhand information about an individual might not
care enough to pay attention to it and retain it over time. Indeed,
receivers of secondhand information listen only selectively to it
(Inman, Reichl, & Baron, 1993), which can lead to a divergence in
perceptions between the provider and receiver of the information
(Gilovich, 1987; Inman et al., 1993).
In spite of these findings, however, we hypothesize that individuals do in fact develop reputations based on their history of
behavior. First, although individuals show variability in their behavior across situations, their average level of behavior across
situations is highly consistent and systematic (Diener & Larsen,
1984; Epstein, 1979; Fleeson, 2001, 2004; Moskowitz, 1982). For
example, in one study the average level of agreeable behavior
individuals exhibited in an entire week correlated with their average level of exhibited agreeable behavior in another week (r ⫽
.94), even though their behavior varied widely from one specific
situation to another within a given week (Fleeson, 2001). This
suggests that although individuals might behave differently across
specific interactions, their aggregated history of behavior should
be systematic and provide the basis for a reputation. For example,
some individuals will behave more cooperatively than others on
average and will thus leave more interaction partners who perceive
them as cooperative.
Second, individuals in communities are motivated to gather and
share accurate information about each other (Baumeister, Zhang,
& Vohs, 2004; Dunbar, 2004; Fehr & Gächter, 2002; Flynn, 2003;
Nowak & Sigmund, 1998; Tetlock, 2002). As noted above, this
information sharing helps individuals successfully navigate their
social environments and helps communities promote cooperation
(Bromley, 1993; Fehr & Gächter, 2002; Granovetter, 1985).
Therefore, individuals should be sufficiently motivated to retain at
least some information about others and to pass some of this
information on to others. The motivation to gather and share

ANDERSON AND SHIRAKO

322

information about others should help people overcome the aforementioned obstacles and allow reputations to develop.

Previous Research
Prior studies can inform us of many of the processes that likely
shape reputations, but they do not provide a complete understanding of reputation development. For example, studies of impressions based on zero-acquaintance or “thin slices” of behavior
(Ambady, Bernieri, & Richeson, 2000; Kenny, Horner, Kashy, &
Chu, 1992) have told us how individuals are perceived at first
glance, but these perceptions can change over time as the perceivers accumulate more information about the target (Snyder &
Uranowitz, 1978). Research on self-presentation has shown how
individuals strive to manage others’ impressions (Baumeister,
1982a, 1982b; Leary & Kowalski, 1990), but that work has not
examined the effects of self-presentation efforts on reputations in
communities.
Laboratory studies (Kenny, 1994) can inform us of how individuals are perceived in small groups. However, such perceptions
are often solely based on direct, firsthand observation of the target.
Individuals’ reputations are typically the product of both firsthand
and secondhand information, and thus reputations are best studied
in communities that exist for extended periods of time and that
allow members to share information about each other (Bromley,
1993; Craik, 2007; Emler, 1990; Nowak & Sigmund, 1998). Finally, studies of close relationships can tell us how individuals are
perceived by friends or romantic partners (Murray, Holmes, &
Griffin, 1996; Swann, 1992), but these perceptions may not represent all evaluations made in a community, including those made
by distant acquaintances (Kenny & Kashy, 1994).

Study 1: Individuals’ History of Behavior and Their
Reputation
In Study 1, we focused on examining the link between individuals’ reputations and their history of behavior. We expected that
reputations would be related to individuals’ behavior history, albeit
not strongly. We tested this hypothesis among Masters of Business
Administration (MBA) students enrolled in negotiation classes.
This MBA sample was ideal to study reputations for many
reasons. First, the negotiation classes lasted many weeks and
students had ample opportunities in and out of class to exchange
information about each other. Second, MBA students’ reputations
among their classmates have real-life consequences; students’
classmates comprise the core of their business network, and their
reputations are important to their career success (Flynn, 2003).
MBA students typically have an average of 3– 4 years of significant work experience beyond their undergraduate schooling, so
they understand the importance of reputation. Third, testing the
link between behavior and reputation would ideally involve tracking individuals’ behavior history over time and across multiple
tasks. In these classes, students negotiated with many other classmates over a series of weeks and on diverse tasks, which allowed
for the measurement of behavior across multiple interactions. This
aggregated approach to behavioral measurement has been advocated by many but used by few (see Diener & Larsen, 1984;
Epstein, 1979; Fleeson, 2004; Moskowitz, 1982).

By studying negotiation contexts, the current research also
makes an important contribution to the literature on bargaining and
conflict resolution. As previous work has shown, negotiators’
reputations can have a profound impact on their success. Negotiators with positive reputations more easily find willing bargaining
partners (Glick & Croson, 2001; Milinski, Semmann, & Krambeck, 2002) and achieve better bargaining outcomes (Tinsley et al.,
2002). When individuals face a negotiator with a positive reputation, they trust that negotiator more, communicate interests and
priorities more openly, and use fewer defensive and distributive
bargaining tactics (Tinsley et al., 2002). However, to our knowledge, negotiation scholars have not examined the origins of negotiator reputations, leaving this critical issue unaddressed.
We focused specifically on predicting these students’ reputations for cooperativeness, a critical dimension of reputation (Fehr
& Gächter, 2002; Flynn, Reagans, Amanatullah, & Ames, 2006;
Granovetter, 1985; Nowak & Sigmund, 1998). Cooperativeness,
which has also been called morality and social desirability, refers
to a tendency to be good to other people and to care about others’
welfare; it involves traits such as sympathy for others’ outcomes,
trustworthiness, and honesty (De Bruin and Van Lange, 1999;
Fiske, Cuddy, Glick, & Xu, 2002; Rosenberg, Nelson, & Vivekananthan, 1968).
In the context of the MBA students we examined, we operationalized individuals’ history of cooperative behavior in two
ways. First, we measured the cooperativeness of individuals’ negotiation outcomes in objective, economic terms. Specifically, we
focused on the integrativeness of individuals’ outcomes (Bazerman & Neale, 1992; Raiffa, 1982; Thompson, 1990). Integrative
performance refers to how well individuals’ agreements effectively satisfy both parties’ interests. Integrative outcomes are typically measured in terms of joint profit or the sum of each negotiator’s individual outcome (Bazerman, Magliozzi, & Neale, 1985;
Mannix & Neale, 1993). To achieve integrative outcomes, individuals must engage in cooperative behavior by building trust, ask
for and share information about preferences and priorities with
their counterpart, and agree to solutions that make both parties
better off (e.g., Bazerman & Neale, 1992; Raiffa, 1982). Therefore,
we hypothesized that negotiators who achieved high integrative
outcomes would develop a reputation as being more cooperative.
Of course, economic outcomes in negotiations can also be
evaluated in terms of distributive performance––that is, how well
individuals secured resources for themselves (e.g., Thompson,
1990). However, the potential effects of distributive outcomes on
reputation were less clear. On the one hand, individuals who
achieve high distributive outcomes might develop reputations as
being less cooperative. High distributive outcomes are often the
product of assertive and forceful bargaining tactics (Bazerman &
Neale, 1992; Galinsky & Mussweiler, 2001; Thompson, 1990). On
the other hand, individuals who achieve low distributive outcomes
are not necessarily more cooperative but, instead, might simply be
poor distributive bargainers; this would suggest no relation between distributive outcomes and reputations. We left the link
between distributive outcomes and reputation as an open research
question.
The second way we operationalized individuals’ cooperative
behavior histories was through ratings provided by their negotiation counterparts. Whether individuals are perceived as cooperative depends not only on their negotiated outcome but also on the

BEHAVIOR AND REPUTATION

process by which that outcome is reached (e.g., Curhan, Elfenbein,
& Xu, 2006; Thibault & Walker, 1975). Individuals’ reputations
for cooperativeness should therefore stem from their behaviors in
addition to their negotiated outcomes. For example, individuals
who attained low integrative outcomes but who behaved honestly
and fairly might still attain a reputation for cooperativeness. We
therefore hypothesized that above and beyond their integrative
outcomes, individuals who behaved in cooperative and trustworthy
ways would develop a reputation as being cooperative.

Method
Participants. Participants were 80 MBA students (45% men,
55% women) enrolled in two negotiation classes at a large East
Coast business school. The courses lasted 6 weeks. For the semester in which the study was run, the business school was comprised
of 27% minority students; the average age was 28 years. There
were no significant differences between the two classes on any
variable nor any differences in main effects, so we combined them
into one sample.
Procedure. Participants engaged in a different negotiation exercise each week of the course. These negotiation exercises were
selected to cover as wide an array of negotiation scenarios as
possible (e.g., they ranged from simple to complex, single issue to
multiple issue, pure business transactions to those involving emotional conflicts between long-term associates). Each exercise
lasted from 30 min to 1 hr 15 min. Participants were randomly
assigned to dyads and negotiation roles for their negotiation. For
our measure of behavior histories, we focused on the four negotiation exercises that were dyadic; the other two exercises involved
larger groups, which made measuring counterparts’ perceptions
impractical. Following each exercise, participants reported their
agreement in the negotiation. They also privately reported their
perceptions of their negotiation counterpart’s cooperative behavior
on a questionnaire. Near the end of the course and after the four
dyadic exercises had been completed, we measured individuals’
reputations for cooperativeness through peer nominations. In total,
the data involved 160 separate negotiations and over 5 hr of data
collection per participant.
Integrative negotiation outcomes. In Week 1, participants engaged in a purely distributive negotiation that involved the purchase of a pharmaceutical plant (see Galinsky & Mussweiler,
2001). We therefore did not code for integrative outcomes in Week
1. In Week 2, participants engaged in a negotiation between an oil
executive and a gas-station owner over the sale of a gas station
(Goldberg, 1997). We coded integrative outcomes in the exercise
using Anderson and Thompson’s (2004) 0- to 2-point coding
scheme. To establish reliability of the codes, a second independent
rater coded 20% of the negotiated deals; the two sets of judgments
agreed perfectly. In Week 3, participants engaged in a negotiation
involving the sale of syndicated television shows (Tenbrunsel &
Bazerman, 2000). For this negotiation, we measured integrative
agreements with a commonly used index of joint outcome or the
sum of dyad members’ raw-score outcomes (Bazerman et al.,
1985; Ben-Yoav & Pruitt, 1984; Mannix & Neale, 1993). In Week
4, participants engaged in a negotiation of a dispute between a
real-estate developer and a carpentry contractor (Greenlaugh,
1993). For this exercise, each dyad was given a point for including
any integrative issue in their deal. A second independent rater

323

coded 20% of the negotiated agreements using the same coding
scheme; these judgments agreed perfectly with the original coder’s
judgments. (See the Appendix for more information on each negotiation and how it was coded.)
To create overall scores for integrative outcomes across negotiation exercises, we standardized participants’ integrative scores
in each negotiation and then averaged those standardized scores
(M ⫽ ⫺.02, SD ⫽ .63). Higher scores reflected better integrative
outcomes across the negotiation tasks.
Distributive negotiation outcomes. In terms of distributive
outcomes (i.e., individuals’ success in securing resources for themselves), for the negotiations in Weeks 1 and 2, higher prices
reflected better outcomes for sellers but worse outcomes for buyers, and lower prices reflected the opposite. Therefore we calculated distributive outcomes in Weeks 1 and 2 by standardizing the
agreed upon sales price and reversing these standardized scores for
buyers by multiplying them by ⫺1. We coded distributive outcomes only for those dyads that reached an agreement (89% and
53% of dyads in Weeks 1 and 2, respectively). For the Week 3
negotiation, we calculated the proportion of the joint value captured by the participant so that the integrative and distributive
outcomes would be unconfounded. For the Week 4 negotiation, we
ranked each dyad according to how well the real estate developer
performed distributively. To establish reliability of the coding of
agreements, a second independent judge ranked all of the negotiated agreements using the same ranking scheme; these rankings
correlated with the original coder’s rankings, r(38) ⫽ .82, p ⬍ .01.
We created aggregate scores for distributive outcomes across
negotiation exercises by standardizing distributive scores in each
negotiation and averaging those standardized scores (M ⫽ ⫺.03,
SD ⫽ .56). Higher scores reflected achieving better distributive
outcomes across the negotiation tasks.
Behavior in the negotiation. After each negotiation exercise,
participants privately rated whether their negotiation partner
strived to satisfy the participant’s interests, satisfied his or her own
interests, and behaved in trustworthy ways, on a scale from 1
(strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). After reverse-scoring the
second item, the three items showed high reliability within each
negotiation exercise (average coefficient ␣ ⫽ .74 across exercises). We thus combined the three items into one measure of
cooperative behavior for each negotiation exercise and averaged
the scores from each exercise to form an overall measure of
cooperative behavior (M ⫽ 4.81, SD ⫽ 0.63).
Participants’ integrative outcomes were not highly related to
their counterparts’ perceptions of their cooperativeness (rs ⫽ .16,
.03, and ⫺.08, respectively, in Weeks 2, 3, and 4; all rs were
nonsignificant). Further, participants’ distributive outcomes were
also not related to their counterparts’ perceptions of their cooperativeness (rs ⫽ .11, .10, .05, and ⫺.03, respectively, in Weeks 1,
2, 3, and 4; all rs were nonsignificant). This is consistent with
previous low correlations between negotiators’ objective outcomes
and their feelings about their opponent (Curhan et al., 2006;
Galinsky, Mussweiler, & Medvec, 2002).
Reputation for cooperativeness. At the end of the course,
participants were asked to nominate their classmates in two categories related to conceptual definitions of cooperativeness: “Who
are the most trustworthy negotiators in the class?” and “Who are
the most gentle-hearted and sympathetic negotiators?” On the
basis of prior sociometric studies (e.g., Coie, Dodge, & Coppotelli,

324

ANDERSON AND SHIRAKO

1982), we operationally defined an individual’s reputation for
cooperativeness as the number of people who perceived him or her
as cooperative. Therefore, we gave participants a point every time
a classmate nominated them in either category. To avoid reputation
scores being artificially inflated by receiving more than one nomination from the same rater, we did not give participants additional
points if the same person nominated them for both categories. The
average number of nominations received was 1.30 (SD ⫽ 1.30).
We tested our hypotheses with raw reputation scores and the
square root of reputation scores (Judd & McClelland, 1989). No
findings changed in any meaningful way, so we report analyses
using raw scores. Men (M ⫽ 1.00, SD ⫽ 0.93) received fewer
nominations for cooperativeness than women (M ⫽ 1.55, SD ⫽
1.50), t(78) ⫽ 1.99, p ⫽ .05. Therefore, we controlled for gender
in all analyses.

Results
Were individuals with a history of cooperation more likely to
develop reputations for cooperativeness? Consistent with expectations, individuals’ history of integrative outcomes across the negotiation tasks predicted their reputation at the end of the course,
r(77) ⫽ .23, p ⬍ .05. Therefore, individuals who achieved more
integrative outcomes were more likely to gain a reputation for
cooperativeness than individuals who achieved less integrative
outcomes.
Moreover, above and beyond their integrative outcomes, individuals’ cooperative behavior across the tasks predicted their reputation for cooperativeness. Controlling for integrative outcomes,
the correlation between cooperative behavior and reputation was
r(76) ⫽ .18, p ⫽ .05; without controlling for integrative outcomes,
the correlation was r(77) ⫽ .17, p ⫽ .08. It was important that the
relation between individuals’ reputations and their cooperative
behavior was significant even after controlling for their integrative
outcomes; in these MBA negotiation classes, the chances of obtaining an effect of individuals’ behavior histories on their reputation might have been unrealistically high because after each
negotiation exercise, each individual’s negotiation outcome was
displayed on the whiteboard for the entire class to see. But given
that individuals’ reputations were predicted by their behavior even
after we controlled for their objective negotiation outcomes, this
helps demonstrate that our reputation effects were not simply a
“whiteboard effect.” Individuals’ opponents, above and beyond the
whiteboard, seemed to be responsible for individuals’ reputation
development.
Though we did not predict a relation, we next examined the
effects of distributive outcomes. Individuals’ distributive outcomes
did not predict their reputations, r(77) ⫽ ⫺.14, ns. This finding
suggests that although individuals’ reputations were tied to their
history of integrative outcomes, they were not necessarily tied to
their history of distributive outcomes. The more individuals
achieved integrative outcomes, the more likely they were to gain a
positive reputation in the community; however, the distributive
outcomes they achieved were unrelated to their overall reputation.

Study 2: Individuals’ Social Connectedness and Their
Reputation
We have argued that individuals’ reputations are tied only
mildly to their behavior in part because attention is a limited

resource in communities; it is difficult for individuals to pay
attention to all others’ behavior and maintain a perfectly accurate
account of each person’s previous actions. As a result, people are
selective in who they attend to and in the information about others
they retain over time.
This “bounded attention” argument implies that if individuals
were to receive more social attention in a community, they would
be more likely to establish a reputation. Individuals whose behaviors are more attended to and talked about should be more likely to
overcome the limitations in community members’ attention. They
would receive more scrutiny, and information about them would
more likely be passed around and retained.
Results from previous studies do in fact suggest that community
members tend to pay more attention to some individuals than
others. In any community, whether a work organization, country
club, or high school, some individuals receive a disproportionate
amount of the community’s attention (Anderson, John, Keltner, &
Kring, 2001; Bromley, 1993; Chance, 1967; Coie et al., 1982;
Derber, 1979). These individuals are known by more community
members, are paid more attention in conversations, and are gossiped about behind closed doors. This increased visibility and
attention in a community can stem from a number of sources. For
example, individuals who occupy positions of power and authority
receive more attention (Chance, 1967; Fiske, 1993; Keltner, Gruenfeld, & Anderson, 2003), as people naturally focus on those who
control critical resources and outcomes.
Results from other studies also suggest that individuals who are
more socially connected, that is, those with more social ties and
who engage in more social interaction, tend to be more prominent
and visible in communities (Brass, 1984; Granovetter, 1985;
Kilduff & Krackhardt, 1994). Social connectedness likely increases social visibility for a number of reasons. First, individuals
who frequently interact with others should remain salient in those
people’s minds. The more people see an individual, the more likely
they would be to recall information about him or her. Second,
people tend to discuss topics on which they share knowledge
(Stasser, Taylor, & Hanna, 1989). Socially connected individuals
should thus be more talked about because more people would
share them as friends or acquaintances. Indeed, studies have shown
that people gossip far more about individuals they know than about
acquaintances or strangers (Baumeister et al., 2004). Third, socially connected individuals might talk about their own behavior
more, drawing attention to themselves and their history of actions;
previous studies have shown that sociability is highly related to the
desire for social attention (Ashton, Lee, & Paunonen, 2002).
In Study 2, we again examined MBA students enrolled in
negotiation classes, this time with the primary aim of testing
whether individuals who were more visible and who received more
attention were more likely to establish reputations. There were no
real differences in power and authority among the MBA students
we examined; participants all related to each other as peers. However, previous research has shown that differences in social connectedness do emerge among MBA students, with some students
establishing more social ties than others (Flynn et al., 2006).
Therefore, in Study 2 we focused on predicting differences in
reputation with differences in social connectedness. We hypothesized that individuals who are more socially connected have a
higher chance of achieving a reputation.

BEHAVIOR AND REPUTATION

Measuring Firsthand and Secondhand, Positive and
Negative Reputations
We also tested directly whether individuals who were more
socially connected would be better remembered by their interaction counterparts (contributing to their firsthand reputation) and
more likely talked about by fellow community members (contributing to their secondhand reputation). When participants nominated their classmates at the end of the term, they reported whether
their nomination was based on negotiating with the target or
hearing about the target from another classmate.
We also wanted to address the concern that socially connected
individuals might be more likely to establish a reputation simply
because they were viewed more positively in general. Therefore,
we asked participants to nominate others on both positive and
negative dimensions and tested the hypothesis that socially connected individuals would be more likely to gain both positive and
negative reputations. If supported, this hypothesis would highlight
an ironic downside of being socially connected. Although previous
work has typically framed social connectedness as a scarce and
valuable social commodity (e.g., Brass, 1984; Burt, 1992;
Granovetter, 1973), it might also present constraints on individuals’ behavior; with more connectedness comes more scrutiny, and
thus individuals might have as high a chance of achieving a
negative reputation as a positive one.

Opponents’ Social Connectedness and Reputation
Along an exploratory vein, we also examined the possible link
between individuals’ reputations and their opponents’ social connectedness. Individuals who negotiate with opponents who are
more socially connected might be more likely to establish a reputation because their opponents can distribute information about
them more widely (they know more people). On the other hand,
research suggests that although individuals with more prominence
in a community are talked about more, they do not necessarily talk
about others more (Keltner et al., 2003). Therefore, having opponents who are more socially connected might not increase the
chances of developing a reputation because their opponents might
forego discussing them with others. We addressed this issue as an
open research question.

Method
Participants. Participants were 39 MBA students (66% men,
34% women) in a semester-long negotiation class at a large West
Coast business school. For the semester in which the study was
run, the business school was comprised of 36% minority students;
the average age was 29 years.
Procedure. We assessed participants’ connectedness before
any negotiation exercises were conducted. As in Study 1, participants then engaged in a series of negotiation exercises, each
exercise on a different week. Participants were again randomly
assigned to their opponents and into negotiation roles. At the end
of the course and after all exercises had been completed, we
measured individuals’ reputations for cooperativeness and selfishness through peer nominations. Because we were focused on the
main effects of social connectedness, we did not collect measures
of behavior history.

325

Social connectedness. On the 1st day of class, participants
rated every other classmate on how well they knew them on a scale
from 0 (do not know this person) to 7 (know this person very well).
Therefore, each participant received 38 ratings from classmates.
These ratings were reliable (coefficient ␣ ⫽ .97), indicating some
individuals were generally better known and well-connected than
others. We averaged the rating assigned to participants to form an
overall measure of their social connectedness (M ⫽ 1.96, SD ⫽
0.89).
Reputation for cooperativeness. Participants were asked to
nominate their classmates in the same two categories used in Study
1: “Who were the most trustworthy negotiators in the class?” and
“Who were the most gentle-hearted and sympathetic negotiators?”
We were interested only in nominations that were based on direct
experience negotiating with the participant or on hearing about the
participant’s negotiation behavior from someone else, rather than
on, say, possessing knowledge of the participant prior to class.
Therefore, after classmates made their nominations, they were
asked whether the nomination was based on direct negotiation
experience with the participant, on hearing about the participant’s
negotiation behavior from someone else, or for other reasons. We
only counted the nomination if it was based on the first two
sources of information. We again gave participants a point if a
classmate nominated them in either category but did not give an
additional point if the same person nominated them for both
categories. We then summed the number of different nominations
each participant received in either of these categories to form an
overall measure of reputation for cooperativeness (M ⫽ 1.46,
SD ⫽ 1.89). There were no gender differences in reputations for
cooperativeness. Further, when controlling for gender, none of the
findings changed significantly.
Reputation for selfishness. We also asked participants to nominate their classmates in two categories related to selfishness: their
aggressiveness in fighting for their own outcomes (“Who are the
most aggressive negotiators?”) and their lack of trustworthiness
(“Who are the most likely to stretch ethical boundaries?”). We
again only counted the nomination if it was based on direct
experience or on hearing about the participant’s behavior from
someone else and did not give participants additional points if the
same person nominated them for both categories. We summed the
number of nominations each participant received in either of these
categories to form an overall measure of reputation for selfishness
(M ⫽ 1.41, SD ⫽ 2.19). Also, as in Study 1, we again tested our
hypotheses with raw reputation scores and the square root of
reputation scores (Judd & McClelland, 1989). No findings
changed in any meaningful way, so we report analyses using raw
scores. Individuals’ reputation for selfishness was negatively related to their reputation for cooperativeness, r(37) ⫽ ⫺.37, p ⬍
.05. Therefore, if individuals developed a reputation for being
cooperative, they were less likely to develop a reputation for being
selfish; however, the two reputations were not redundant. There
were no gender differences in selfish reputations. Further, when
controlling for gender, none of the findings changed significantly.

Results
We first examined whether socially connected individuals were
more likely to gain a reputation of any kind, in terms of the total
number of nominations they received for cooperativeness or self-

326

ANDERSON AND SHIRAKO

ishness. Consistent with expectations, social connectedness correlated with the total number of nominations received, r(37) ⫽ .44,
p ⬍ .01. Moreover, this effect held up for both firsthand and
secondhand reputations. Socially connected individuals were more
likely to develop a firsthand reputation, r(37) ⫽ .41, p ⬍ .01,
suggesting that their behavior was more likely to be remembered
by their negotiation counterparts. They were also more likely to
develop a secondhand reputation, r(37) ⫽ .27, p ⬍ .05, suggesting
that they were more likely to be talked about by others.
It is important to note that socially connected individuals were
not more likely to garner a reputation simply because they were
viewed more positively in the community. In fact, social connectedness correlated with reputations for selfishness, r(37) ⫽ .30, p ⬍
.05, and the relation with cooperative reputations did not quite
reach significance, r(37) ⫽ .20, ns.
Finally, we found no support for the idea that individuals were
more likely to establish a reputation when their opponents were
more socially connected. Individuals whose opponents had higher
average social connectedness scores were not more likely to gain
a reputation, r(37) ⫽ .13, ns; they were also not more likely to gain
a secondhand reputation, r(37) ⫽ ⫺.23, ns. This null finding is
consistent with prior research (Keltner et al., 2003), suggesting that
individuals who are more socially connected are more likely to be
talked about by others (in that they are more likely to gain a
secondhand reputation) but are not more likely to talk about others
(in that their opponents are not more likely to gain a secondhand
reputation).

Study 3: The Interaction Between Behavior and Social
Connectedness in Predicting Reputation
We showed in Studies 1 and 2 that individuals’ reputations were
a product of their history of behavior and their social connectedness, respectively. In Study 3 we tested whether these two factors
interact in predicting reputation. Specifically, we hypothesized that
the relation between individuals’ history of behavior and their
reputation would be stronger for more socially connected individuals than for less socially connected individuals. Support for this
hypothesis would provide more direct evidence that communities
pay more attention to and scrutinize the behavior of the socially
connected. Further, it would help rule out a potential alternative
explanation of the findings in Study 2. Namely, we excluded all
nominations from our reputation measure that were based on
knowledge of the participant prior to the class. However, participants might have been unaware of the true cause of their nomination (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977). Therefore, we cannot be absolutely
sure that the nominations at the end of the class did not reflect
people’s reputations prior to the class. In Study 3, by showing that
behavior more strongly predicts reputations for socially connected
individuals, we would more convincingly demonstrate that behavior, in addition to social connectedness, shapes reputations.
The design of Study 3 therefore combined the designs of Studies
1 and 2. We again examined MBA students in negotiation classes.
We collected measures of social connectedness in addition to
measures of behavior histories across negotiation tasks and used
both to predict reputation at the end of the course. In total, the data
in Study 3 involved 133 separate negotiation interactions and over
8 hr of data collection per participant.

Along an exploratory vein, we also wanted to examine whether
socially connected individuals were more likely to gain a reputation because they behaved in systematically different ways in the
negotiations than less socially connected individuals. For example,
socially connected individuals might have behaved in more extreme ways–– either extremely cooperatively or extremely
selfishly––which in turn would lead to more visibility and broader
reputations. Or, socially connected individuals might have behaved in more consistent ways, leading others in the community to
perceive them in a more uniform way.

Method
Participants. Participants were 39 MBA students (79% men,
21% women) in a semester-long negotiation class at a large West
Coast business school; none of the students overlapped between
Study 2 and Study 3. For the semester in which the study was run,
the business school was comprised of 36% minority students; the
average age was 29 years.
Procedure. We measured individuals’ social connectedness at
the beginning of the class, before any negotiation exercises were
conducted. As in Studies 1 and 2, participants engaged in a series
of negotiation exercises, each exercise on a different week. Participants were randomly assigned to their opponents and into
negotiation roles. For our measure of behavior histories, we focused on the seven negotiation exercises that were dyadic or
triadic; three other exercises involved larger groups, which made
measuring counterparts’ perceptions impractical. Again, following
each exercise, participants reported their negotiated agreements
and then privately reported their perceptions of their counterparts.
At the end of the course, we measured individuals’ reputations for
cooperativeness and selfishness through peer nominations.
Social connectedness. As in Study 2, participants rated every
other classmate on how well they knew them on a scale from 0 (do
not know this person) to 7 (know this person very well). These
ratings again showed reliability (coefficient ␣ ⫽ .78), indicating
some individuals were generally better known and socially connected than others. We averaged the rating assigned to participants
to form an overall measure of social connectedness (M ⫽ 2.34,
SD ⫽ 0.72).
Behavior in the negotiations. After each negotiation exercise,
participants rated how much their counterpart considered the participant’s wishes, opinions, or needs; how sympathetic the counterpart was to the participant’s concerns and cared about the
participant’s interests; and whether the counterpart behaved in
trustworthy ways. These items showed high reliability within each
negotiation exercise (average coefficient ␣ ⫽ .87 across negotiations). We thus combined them to form one measure of cooperative behavior for each negotiation. We then averaged these combined measures across negotiation exercises to form an overall
measure of cooperative behavior (M ⫽ 4.81, SD ⫽ 0.63).
Integrative negotiation outcomes. Four of the negotiation exercises were the same as those used in Study 1. For those exercises,
we coded participants’ integrative outcomes the same way as in
Study 1. One new negotiation exercise involved a dyadic negotiation between a job recruiter and candidate (Neale, 1997); for this,
we again measured integrative outcomes on the basis of the sum of
dyad members’ own outcomes. The final two negotiations involved the sale of a housing development (Karp, 1995) and the

BEHAVIOR AND REPUTATION

mediation of a conflict between two subordinates by their manager
(Schroth & Riding, 1997). Coding participants’ outcomes in these
negotiations was impractical. In the former exercise, although
some integrative issues could be added to the deal, they would only
be added at the expense of the seller, thus reducing the seller’s
gains (see Karp, 1995). For the latter, it was unclear how to code
the integrative outcome of a mediator who was not engaged in the
conflict.
We created aggregate scores for integrative outcomes across
negotiation exercises by standardizing each participant’s integrative score in each negotiation and then averaging those standardized scores (M ⫽ ⫺.01, SD ⫽ .49). Higher scores indicate achieving more integrative outcomes across the negotiations.
Participants’ integrative outcomes were related to their cooperative
behavior, r(37) ⫽ .37, p ⬍ .05.
Distributive negotiation outcomes. For the negotiation exercises that we used in Study 1, we coded participants’ distributive
outcomes the same way using the same coders. For the negotiation
between a job recruiter and candidate, we again calculated the
proportion of the joint value captured by the participant. We
created aggregate scores for distributive outcomes across negotiation exercises by standardizing each participant’s distributive
score in each negotiation and averaging those standardized scores
(M ⫽ 0.02, SD ⫽ 0.49). Participants’ distributive outcomes were
not related to their behavior, r(37) ⫽ ⫺.10.
Reputation for cooperativeness. Participants nominated their
classmates in the same two categories used in Studies 1 and 2:
“Who were the most trustworthy negotiators in the class?” and
“Who were the most gentle-hearted and sympathetic negotiators?”
As in Study 2, after classmates nominated a participant, they were
asked whether they based their nomination on direct negotiation
experience with the participant, on hearing about the participant’s
negotiation behavior from someone else, or for other reasons. We
only counted the nomination if it was based on the first two
sources of information. We again gave participants a point if a
classmate nominated them in either category but did not give an
additional point if the same person nominated them for both
categories. We then summed the number of different nominations
each participant received in either category to form an overall
measure of reputation for cooperativeness (M ⫽ 1.56, SD ⫽ 1.87).
Men (M ⫽ 1.26, SD ⫽ 1.75) were less likely than women (M ⫽
2.75, SD ⫽ 2.00) to gain a reputation for cooperativeness, t(37) ⫽
2.09, p ⬍ .05. Therefore, we controlled for gender when predicting
reputations for cooperativeness.
Reputation for selfishness. Participants nominated their
classmates in three categories related to selfishness: “Who were
the most aggressive negotiators?”; “Who were the most ruthless
negotiators?”; and “Who were the most likely to stretch ethical
boundaries?” We again only counted the nomination if it was
based on direct experience negotiating with the participant or
on hearing about the participant’s negotiation behavior from
someone else. We summed the number of different nominations
each participant received in any of these categories to form an
overall measure of reputation for selfishness (M ⫽ 2.78, SD ⫽
4.12). The relation between cooperative and selfish reputations
was similar to that in Study 2, r(37) ⫽ ⫺.41, p ⬍ .01. Men
(M ⫽ 3.42, SD ⫽ 4.46) were more likely than women (M ⫽
0.25, SD ⫽ 0.71) to gain a reputation for selfishness, t(37) ⫽

327

1.99, p ⫽ .05. Therefore, we controlled for gender when predicting reputations for selfishness.

Results
The primary question in this study was whether individuals’
behavior more strongly predicted their reputation when they were
socially connected. To examine this question, we used moderated
multiple regression analyses (Cohen, Cohen, West, & Aiken,
2003). We predicted individuals’ reputation for cooperativeness on
the basis of their behavior (␤ ⫽ .28, B ⫽ 0.84, SE ⫽ .42, p ⬍ .05),
social connectedness (␤ ⫽ .53, B ⫽ 0.38, SE ⫽ .27, p ⫽ .08),
and the interaction of social connectedness and behavior (␤ ⫽
.34, B ⫽ 1.78, SE ⫽ .73, p ⬍ .05). As the interaction term was
significant, the relation between cooperative behavior and reputations for cooperativeness depended upon individuals’ social
connectedness.
This interaction effect is illustrated in Figure 1A. As shown, the
steeper slope for more socially connected individuals indicates that
they developed reputations for cooperativeness more easily when
they behaved cooperatively (for individuals one standard deviation
above the mean on social connectedness, B ⫽ 2.13) than less
socially connected individuals, whose reputations for cooperativeness were less strongly related to their behavior (for individuals
one standard deviation below the mean on social connectedness,
B ⫽ ⫺0.45).
We next predicted individuals’ reputation for selfishness on
the basis of their behavior (␤ ⫽ ⫺.44, B ⫽ ⫺2.90, SE ⫽ .73,
p ⬍ .01), social connectedness (␤ ⫽ .42, B ⫽ 2.45, SE ⫽ .67,
p ⬍ .01), and the interaction of social connectedness and
behavior (␤ ⫽ ⫺.35, B ⫽ ⫺4.11, SE ⫽ 1.29, p ⬍ .01). The
significant interaction term indicates the relation between behavior and reputation for selfishness also depended upon individuals’ social connectedness. This interaction is illustrated in
Figure 1B; the steeper slope for more connected individuals
indicates that they developed reputations for selfishness more
easily when they behaved selfishly (for individuals one standard
deviation above the mean on social connectedness, B ⫽ 5.87),
compared to less connected individuals, whose selfish behavior
had a lesser effect (for individuals one standard deviation below
the mean on social connectedness, B ⫽ ⫺0.07).
These interaction effects also held up for both firsthand and
secondhand reputations. For reputations for cooperativeness, the
interaction terms were ␤ ⫽ .33, B ⫽ 1.42, SE ⫽ .62, p ⬍ .05, for
firsthand reputations, and ␤ ⫽ .26, B ⫽ 0.36, SE ⫽ .21, p ⫽ .05,
for secondhand reputations. For reputations for selfishness, the
interaction terms were ␤ ⫽ ⫺.32, B ⫽ ⫺1.88, SE ⫽ .67, p ⬍ .01,
for firsthand reputations, and ␤ ⫽ ⫺.39, B ⫽ ⫺2.22, SE ⫽ .65,
p ⬍ .01, for secondhand reputations. These findings indicate that
socially connected individuals’ reputations for cooperativeness
and selfishness had a stronger relation to their behavior because
they were both more likely to be remembered by their opponents
and more likely to be talked about by others.
In terms of integrative outcomes, we predicted cooperative
reputation on the basis of integrative outcomes (␤ ⫽ .13, B ⫽ 0.50,
SE ⫽ .62, ns), social connectedness (␤ ⫽ .18, B ⫽ 0.48, SE ⫽ .44,
ns), and their interaction, (␤ ⫽ .25, B ⫽ 1.54, SE ⫽ 1.00, p ⫽ .06).
Thus, at a level that approached significance, the more socially
connected the individual, the more likely his or her integrative

ANDERSON AND SHIRAKO

328

A.
1.50

More socially
connected
individuals

1.00
0.50

Reputation for
cooperativeness

0.00
-0.50
-1.00

Less socially
connected
individuals

-1.50
-2.00

Low

High
Cooperative behavior

B.
10.50

More socially
connected
individuals

9.00
7.50

Reputation for
selfishness

6.00
4.50
3.00

Less socially
connected
individuals

1.50
0.00

Low

High
Selfish behavior

Figure 1. A: In predicting individuals’ reputations for cooperativeness, more socially connected individuals
were more likely to gain a reputation for being cooperative when they behaved cooperatively, as compared to
less socially connected individuals. B: In predicting individuals’ reputations for selfishness, more socially
connected individuals were more likely to gain a reputation for being selfish when they behaved selfishly, as
compared to less socially connected individuals. For illustrative purposes, we reversed cooperative-behavior
scores, such that higher scores reflect behaving more selfishly.

outcomes would result in a positive reputation for cooperativeness.
As in Study 1, individuals’ reputations did not relate to their
distributive outcomes.
We next tested whether the effects of cooperative behavior held
up even after controlling for integrative outcomes to help alleviate
concerns that our findings might simply be due to “whiteboard
effects.” After controlling for integrative outcomes, the interaction

between cooperative behavior and social connectedness remained
significant in predicting reputations for cooperativeness (␤ ⫽ .34,
B ⫽ 1.77, SE ⫽ 0.74, p ⬍ .05) and in predicting reputations for
selfishness (␤ ⫽ ⫺.35, B ⫽ ⫺4.09, SE ⫽ 1.31, p ⬍ .01). Therefore, the reputations of socially connected individuals were more
strongly related to their behavior in part because their opponents
talked about them.

BEHAVIOR AND REPUTATION

Opponents’ social connectedness. We again did not find evidence for the idea that individuals were more likely to obtain
reputations when their opponents were more socially connected.
Individuals’ opponents’ social connectedness was not significantly
correlated with participants’ reputations for cooperativeness,
r(36) ⫽ ⫺.27, p ⫽ .10, or with participants’ reputations for
selfishness, r(36) ⫽ ⫺.14, ns. Consistent with prior research, these
null findings suggest that socially connected individuals may be
talked about more but do not necessarily talk more about others.
Social connectedness and behavior. In our multiple regression
analyses, we found that socially connected individuals were more
likely to gain reputations. Was this because they behaved in
systematically different ways in the negotiations? We did not find
evidence for this hypothesis. Social connectedness was unrelated
to cooperative behavior, r(37) ⫽ ⫺.07, integrative outcomes,
r(37) ⫽ .15, as well as distributive outcomes, r(37) ⫽ .02 (all rs
were nonsignificant).
Individuals’ social connectedness was also unrelated to the
extremity of their behaviors and outcomes. We subtracted the
sample mean from each individual’s score on cooperative behavior, integrative outcomes, and distributive outcomes, and calculated the absolute value of these mean-centered scores. Thus,
higher values indicated more extreme behavior (highly cooperative
or highly selfish), more extreme integrative outcomes (high or
low), and more extreme distributive outcomes (high or low),
whereas lower values indicated more moderate behavior and outcomes. Social connectedness was not correlated with extremity in
behavior, r(37) ⫽ .01, with extremity in integrative outcomes,
r(37) ⫽ .07, or with extremity in distributive outcomes, r(37) ⫽
.07 (all rs were nonsignificant).
Taken together, these null effects are particularly interesting
because they suggest socially connected individuals are more
likely to gain positive or negative reputations even though they
behave in the negotiations the same way as less socially connected
individuals. That is, socially connected individuals are more likely
to gain reputations even though they engage in the same behavior
anyone else does.
On the basis of previous research (e.g., Fleeson, 2004), we did
not expect individuals to behave similarly across weeks, even if
their average level of behavior across interactions was consistent
and systematic. However, one possibility was that socially connected individuals would be more likely to establish a reputation
because they behaved in more consistent ways across negotiations
than less socially connected individuals. We found no support for
this possibility, however. There was no consistency across negotiations in less socially connected individuals’ cooperative behavior (coefficient ␣ ⫽ .00) or in more socially connected individuals’
cooperative behavior (coefficient ␣ ⫽ .00). There was also no
consistency across negotiations in less socially connected individuals’ integrative outcomes (coefficient ␣ ⫽ .03) or in more socially
connected individuals’ integrative outcomes (coefficient ␣ ⫽ .00).

General Discussion
Using a multimethod approach, we found that individuals’ reputations were a product of both their history of behavior and their
social connectedness among peers. Specifically, we found a main
effect for behavior, in that individuals who behaved in more
cooperative ways developed a reputation of being more coopera-

329

tive and those who behaved in more selfish ways developed a
reputation of being more selfish. We also found a main effect of
social connectedness, in that individuals who were well known
among their peers developed reputations more easily than individuals who were not. Further, we found that social connectedness
moderated the link between behavior and reputation: When individuals were more socially connected, their reputation was more
tightly linked to their behavior history.
The data had many strengths: It involved diverse types of
measures from multiple sources, including peer reports of behavior
in negotiations, objective bargaining outcomes, peer ratings of
social connectedness, and peer-nomination measures of reputation.
Moreover, the data were extensive. For example, Study 1 involved
160 separate negotiations and over 5 hr of data collection per
participant, and Study 3 involved 133 separate negotiation interactions and over 8 hr of data collection per participant. One
limitation to the data, however, is that it involved MBA students in
negotiation classes, which might have reduced the generalizability
of the findings. For example, students in these classes were able to
observe each other’s objective negotiation outcomes as they were
publicly displayed on the classroom whiteboard. Therefore, the
classroom setting might have increased the likelihood of individuals developing a reputation based on their history of behavior
because such outcomes were immediately made public.
We did find that individuals’ reputations were predicted by their
counterparts’ perceptions of their behavior even after controlling
for their objective negotiated outcome, which would suggest that
our findings were not simply due to a “whiteboard effect.” We also
measured reputation in Studies 2 and 3 by using only nominations
based on firsthand negotiation experience and secondhand knowledge; therefore, reputations did not seem to be based on comments
made during classroom discussions. Nonetheless, future research
should examine the development of reputations in nonclassroom
environments.

Implications
The current findings contribute to a number of literatures––
including the small but growing body of research on reputation
(Bromley, 1993; Fehr & Gächter, 2002; Flynn, 2003; Hardy & Van
Vugt, 2006; Nowak & Sigmund, 1998). Many theorists have
argued that reputations serve social functions. For example, they
help individuals garner information about others, reward prosocial
behavior, and punish anti-social behavior. Our findings suggest
that reputations do serve these functions but perhaps more effectively for some individuals than others. Specifically, community
members may be more likely to find out information about those
who are socially connected than about those on the fringes of the
social network. Also, reputations might be more rewarding and
punishing for those who are socially connected than for those who
are not. Interestingly, individuals with fewer social ties might get
away with behaving in more deceptive and selfish ways because
fewer people pay attention to or talk about them.
The current findings also contribute to the literature on social
connectedness–– or what is also sometimes called network centrality. Social connectedness is generally viewed as a positive social
outcome, a scarce resource that individuals strive for (Brass, 1984;
Burt, 1992). Being connected provides more job opportunities
(Granovetter, 1973), greater access to and control over important

330

ANDERSON AND SHIRAKO

information (Burt, 1992), and a broader base of social support.
However, our findings suggest that being socially connected also
has disadvantages. For example, with more connections comes
more scrutiny, and thus connected individuals are more often in the
public eye. They have a higher chance of achieving a negative
reputation when they behave in anti-social ways. One interesting
question for future research is whether connected individuals have
to engage in more self-presentation behavior (Baumeister, 1982a,
1982b) to maintain a positive reputation.
Finally, the current findings contribute to negotiations research.
Reputations are very important to a negotiator’s success in terms
of obtaining willing bargaining partners (Glick & Croson, 2001;
Milinski et al., 2002) and achieving better outcomes (Tinsley et al.,
2002). Therefore, students of negotiation are exhorted to behave
cooperatively out of concern for their reputation (Fisher, Ury, &
Patton, 1991; Lewicki, Barry, Saunders, & Minton, 2003; Thompson, 1998). However, to our knowledge, no previous study has
examined whether negotiators’ behavior can actually affect their
reputation. The current studies provide empirical support for the
argument that behavior does in fact impact reputation, but it also
suggests that the story is more nuanced. Specifically, it suggests
that negotiators should be particularly careful about their behavior
when they are highly socially connected and receive more social
attention.

Future Directions
One limitation of the current studies is that we did not directly
examine the processes that underlie reputation development. For
example, we did not examine the flow of communication that led
individuals’ behavior histories to shape their reputation. As we
outlined in the introduction, an intuitive model of reputation development would be that individuals develop a firsthand reputation
by interacting with multiple people over time; they then develop a
secondhand reputation when their interaction partners tell others
about them.
Though our data were not designed to directly test this model,
one way to indirectly test it would be to correlate individuals’
firsthand and secondhand reputations. If related, it would suggest
that firsthand reputations might in fact have been contributing to
secondhand reputations. To conduct this analysis, we combined
the data from Studies 2 and 3 for the most robust analysis possible
(standardizing variables within each study). We found that individuals’ firsthand and secondhand reputations were in fact related,
r(78) ⫽ .51, p ⬍ .01. This provides at least suggestive evidence for
our model of reputation development.
Of course, it is also possible that secondhand perceivers also
shaped firsthand perceivers’ judgments about the individual before
the firsthand perceivers even interacted with that individual. To
provide stronger evidence that firsthand reputations shaped secondhand reputations, we next predicted individuals’ secondhand
reputations with only the nominations made by their opponents in
the Week 1 negotiation exercise––presumably, individuals’ opponents in the Week 1 exercise would not have heard anything about
them. We obtained a correlation of r(78) ⫽ .27, p ⬍ .05. This
provides more direct evidence that firsthand reputations led to
secondhand reputations, rather than vice versa.
Finally, neither Study 1 nor Study 3 found a relation between
distributive outcomes and reputation. At first glance, this null

finding seems surprising because individuals who behave in manipulative and selfish ways tend to achieve better distributive
outcomes (Wilson, Near, & Miller, 1996) and, as we have found,
are more likely to gain reputations for selfishness, suggesting
individuals who achieve high distributive outcomes might gain
reputations for selfishness. However, individuals can achieve distributive outcomes by using assertive but fair tactics such as
making the first offer (Galinsky & Mussweiler, 2001); manipulative and deceitful behavior is not necessary. Therefore, individuals
who achieve better distributive outcomes might gain reputations of
being superior distributive bargainers, even if they do not gain
reputations for selfishness––a question future research should address.

Conclusion
One important implication of the current research is that reputation development is a more complex and interesting process than
some economic theories have implied. Such theories suggest that
information about individuals is transferred efficiently among
community members and that reputation development is a uniform
process across individuals and groups. If one community member
behaves unethically, for example, most or all other community
members will find out about it. But given limitations in human
attention, person perception processes, and information exchange,
reputation systems are probably far from perfectly efficient.
Given the complexity of the processes through which reputations develop, we believe psychological factors play a major role
in determining how and when individuals establish reputations––
and therefore, that psychologists are in a unique position to make
important contributions to this topic. For example, the initial
perceptions people form of an individual that form the basis of that
individual’s reputation are likely shaped by factors such as attraction, stereotyping, liking, group membership, and social motives––
all topics that psychologists know well. Moreover, the individual’s
own self-presentation style, need for belongingness, selfperceptions, or status striving will also determine how they adapt
their behavior to regulate their reputation. Psychologists thus have
an important opportunity to bring their unique skills, knowledge,
and methodological approaches to the study of reputation. We
hope the current research helps invigorate psychological work on
the topic.

References
Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality: A psychological interpretation. New
York: Holt.
Ambady, N., Bernieri, F. J., & Richeson, J. A. (2000). Toward a histology
of social behavior: Judgmental accuracy from thin slices of the behavioral stream. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology: Vol. 32 (pp. 201–271). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Anderson, C., John, O. P., Keltner, D., & Kring, A. M. (2001). Who attains
social status? Effects of personality traits and physical attractiveness in
social groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 116 –
132.
Anderson, C., & Thompson, L. L. (2004). Affect from the top down: How
powerful individuals’ positive affect shapes negotiations. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 95, 125–139.
Ashton, M. C., Lee, K., & Paunonen, S. V. (2002). What is the central
feature of extraversion? Social attention versus reward sensitivity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 245–252.

BEHAVIOR AND REPUTATION
Baumeister, R. F. (1982a). Self-esteem, self-presentation, and future interaction: A dilemma of reputation. Journal of Personality, 50, 29 – 45.
Baumeister, R. F. (1982b). A self-presentational view of social phenomena.
Psychological Bulletin, 91, 3–26.
Baumeister, R. F., Zhang, L., & Vohs, K. D. (2004). Gossip as cultural
learning. Review of General Psychology, 8, 111–121.
Bazerman, M. H., Magliozzi, T., & Neale, M. A. (1985). Integrative
bargaining in a competitive market. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 34, 294 –313.
Bazerman, M. H., & Neale, M. A. (1992). Negotiating rationally. New
York: Free Press.
Ben-Yoav, O., & Pruitt, D. (1984). Resistance to yielding and the expectation of cooperative future interaction in negotiation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 20, 323–353.
Berger, J., Cohen, B. P., & Zelditch, M. (1972). Status characteristics and
social interaction. American Sociological Review, 37, 241–255.
Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: Wiley.
Brass, D. J. (1984). Being in the right place: A structural analysis of
individual influence in an organization. Administrative Science Quarterly, 29, 518 –539.
Bromley, D. B. (1993). Reputation, image and impression management.
New York: Wiley.
Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural holes: The social structure of competition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Byrne, R., & Whiten, A. (1988). Machiavellian intelligence: Social expertise and the evolution of intellect in monkeys, apes, and humans. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Chance, M. R. A. (1967). Attention structure as the basis of primate rank
order. Man, 2, 503–518.
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aiken, L. S. (2003). Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (3rd ed.).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Coie, J. D., Dodge, K. A., & Coppotelli, H. (1982). Dimensions and types
of social status: A cross-age perspective. Developmental Psychology, 18,
557–570.
Cooley, C. H. (1902). Human nature and the social order. New York:
Scribner.
Craik, K. H. (2007). Personality research methods: Taxonomies, trends,
and integrations. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. Kruger (Eds.),
Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 209 –
223). New York: Guilford Press.
Curhan, J. R., Elfenbein, H., & Xu, H. (2006). What do people value when
they negotiate? Mapping the domain of subjective value in negotiation.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 493–512.
De Bruin, E. N. M., & Van Lange, P. A. M. (1999). Impression formation
and cooperative behavior. European Journal of Social Psychology, 29,
305–328.
Derber, C. (1979). The pursuit of attention: Power and individualism in
everyday life. New York: Oxford University Press.
Diener, E., & Larsen, R. J. (1984). Temporal stability and cross-situational
consistency of affective, behavioral, and cognitive responses. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 871– 883.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (2004). Gossip in evolutionary perspective. Review of
General Psychology, 8, 100 –110.
Emler, N. (1990). A social psychology of reputation. European Review of
Social Psychology, 1, 171–193.
Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: I. On predicting most of the
people much of the time. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
37, 1097–1126.
Fehr, E., & Gächter, S. (2002, January 10). Altruistic punishment in
humans. Nature, 415, 137–140.
Fisher, R., Ury, W. L., & Patton, B. (1991). Getting to yes: Negotiating
agreement without giving in. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.

331

Fiske, S. T. (1993). Controlling other people: The impact of power on
stereotyping. American Psychologist, 48, 621– 628.
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). A model of (often
mixed) stereotype content: Competence and warmth respectively follow
from perceived status and competition. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 82, 878 –902.
Fleeson, W. (2001). Toward a structure- and process-integrated view of
personality: Traits as density distributions of states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 1011–1027.
Fleeson, W. (2004). Moving personality beyond the person-situation debate: The challenge and the opportunity of within-person variability.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 83– 87.
Flynn, F. J. (2003). How much should I give and how often? The effects
of generosity and frequency of favor exchange on social status and
productivity. Academy of Management Journal, 46, 539 –553.
Flynn, F. J., Reagans, R., Amanatullah, E. T., & Ames, D. R. (2006).
Helping one’s way to the top: Self-monitors achieve status by helping
others and knowing who helps whom. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 91, 1123–1137.
Galinsky, A. D., & Mussweiler, T. (2001). First offers as anchors: The role
of perspective-taking and negotiator focus. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81, 657– 669.
Galinsky, A. D., Mussweiler, T., & Medvec, V. H. (2002). Disconnecting
outcomes and evaluations: The role of negotiator focus. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1131–1140.
Gilovich, T. (1987). Secondhand information and social judgment. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 23, 59 –74.
Glick, S., & Croson, R. (2001). Reputations in negotiation. In S. J. Hoch,
H. C. Kunreuther, & R. E. Gunther (Eds.), Wharton on making decisions
(pp. 177–186). New York: Wiley.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York:
Anchor Books.
Goldberg, S. (1997). Texoil. In J. M. Brett (Ed.), Teaching materials for
negotiations and decision making. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University, Dispute Resolution Research Center.
Granovetter, M. S. (1983). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of
Sociology, 78, 1360 –1380.
Granovetter, M. S. (1985). Economic action and social structure: The
problem of embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology, 91, 481–510.
Greenlaugh, L. (1993). Viking. In J. M. Brett (Ed.), Teaching materials for
negotiations and decision making. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University, Dispute Resolution Research Center.
Hardy, C. L., & Van Vugt, M. (2006). Nice guys finish first: The competitive altruism hypothesis. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
32, 1402–1413.
Hartshorne, H., & May, M. A. (1928). Studies in the nature of character:
Vol. 1. Studies in deceit. New York: Macmillan.
Hastie, R., & Kumar, P. A. (1979). Person memory: Personality traits as
organizing principles in memory for behavior. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 37, 25–38.
Hogan, R. (1983). A socioanalytic theory of personality. In M. Page (Ed.),
Nebraska symposium on motivation, 1982: Personality. Current theory
and research (pp. 55– 89). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Hogan, R. (1996). A socioanalytic perspective on the five-factor model. In
J. S. Wiggins (Ed.), The five-factor model of personality: Theoretical
perspectives (pp. 163–179). New York: Guilford.
Homans, G. C. (1951). The human group. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Inman, M. L., Reichl, A. J., & Baron, R. S. (1993). Do we tell less than we
know or hear less than we are told? Exploring the teller/listener extremity effect. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 29, 528 –550.
Judd, C. M., & McClelland, G. H. (1989). Data analysis: A modelcomparison approach. San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace.
Karp, R. (1995). The Bullard Houses. In J. M. Brett (Ed.), Teaching

332

ANDERSON AND SHIRAKO

materials for negotiations and decision making. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University, Dispute Resolution Research Center.
Keltner, D., Gruenfeld, D. H., & Anderson, C. (2003). Power, approach,
and inhibition. Psychological Review, 110, 265–284.
Kenny, D. A. (1994). Interpersonal perception. New York: Guilford.
Kenny, D. A., Horner, C., Kashy, D. A., & Chu, L. (1992). Consensus at
zero-acquaintance: Replication, behavioral cues, and stability. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 88 –97.
Kenny, D. A., & Kashy, D. A. (1994). Enhanced co-orientation in the
perception of friends: A social relations analysis. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 67, 1024 –1033.
Kilduff, M., & Krackhardt, D. (1994). Bringing the individual back in: A
structural analysis of the internal market for reputation in organizations.
Academy of Management Journal, 37, 87–108.
Leary, M. R., & Kowalski, R. M. (1990). Impression management: A
literature review and two-component model. Psychological Bulletin,
107, 34 – 47.
Leary, M. R., Tambor, E. S., Terdal, S. K., & Downs, D. L. (1995).
Self-esteem as an interpersonal monitor: The sociometer hypothesis.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 518 –530.
Lewicki, R. J., Barry, B., Saunders, D. M., & Minton, J. (2003). Essentials
of negotiation (Vol. 3). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Mannix, E. A., & Neale, M. A. (1993). Power imbalance and the pattern of
exchange in dyadic negotiation. Group Decision and Negotiation, 2,
119 –133.
Milinski, M., Semmann, D., & Krambeck, H. J. (2002, January 24).
Reputation helps solve the ‘tragedy of the commons.’ Nature, 415,
424 – 426.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: Wiley.
Moskowitz, D. S. (1982). Coherence and cross-situational generality in
personality: A new analysis of old problems. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 43, 754 –768.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. (1996). The benefits of
positive illusions: Idealization and the construction of satisfaction in
close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70,
79 –98.
Neale, M. A. (1997). New recruit. In J. M. Brett (Ed.), Teaching materials
for negotiations and decision making. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University, Dispute Resolution Research Center.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know:
Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychological Review, 84, 231–259.
Nowak, M. A., & Sigmund, K. (1998, June 11). Evolution of indirect
reciprocity by image scoring. Nature, 393, 573–577.
Raiffa, H. (1982). The art and science of negotiation: How to resolve

conflicts and get the best out of bargaining. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Rosenberg, S., Nelson, C., & Vivekananthan, P. S. (1968). A multidimensional approach to the structure of personality impressions. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 9, 283–294.
Schroth, H. A., & Riding, G. (1997). Telepro. In J. M. Brett (Ed.),
Teaching materials for negotiations and decision making. Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University, Dispute Resolution Research Center.
Snyder, M., & Uranowitz, S. W. (1978). Reconstructing the past: Some
cognitive consequences of person perception. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36, 941–950.
Stangor, C., & McMillan, D. (1992). Memory for expectancy-congruent
and expectancy-incongruent information: A review of the social and
social developmental literatures. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 42– 61.
Stasser, G., Taylor, L., & Hanna, C. (1989). Information sampling in
structured and unstructured discussions of three- and six-person groups.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 67–78.
Swann, W. B. (1992). Seeking “truth,” finding despair: Some unhappy
consequences of a negative self-concept. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 1, 15–18.
Taylor, S. E. (1998). The social being in social psychology. In D. T.
Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (4th ed., pp. 58 –98). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Tenbrunsel, A. E., & Bazerman, M. H. (2000). Moms.com. In J. M. Brett
(Ed.), Teaching materials for negotiations and decision making. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University, Dispute Resolution Research Center.
Tetlock, P. E. (2002). Social functionalist frameworks for judgment and
choice: Intuitive politicians, theologians, and prosecutors. Psychological
Review, 109, 451– 471.
Thibault, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups.
New York: Wiley.
Thibault, J., & Walker, L. (1975). Procedural justice: A psychological
analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thompson, L. L. (1990). An examination of naı̈ve and experienced negotiators. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 82–90.
Thompson, L. L. (1998). The mind and heart of the negotiator. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Tinsley, C. H., O’Connor, K. M., & Sullivan, B. A. (2002). Tough guys
finish last: The perils of a distributive reputation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 88, 621– 645.
Wilson, D. S., Near, D., & Miller, R. R. (1996). Machiavellianism: A
synthesis of the evolutionary and psychological literatures. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 285–299.

BEHAVIOR AND REPUTATION

333

Appendix
Coding the Outcomes in the Negotiation Exercises
For the negotiation over the sale of a gas station, station
owners needed to sell for at least $580,000. This amount would
allow them to take a 2-year vacation sailing around the world,
pay off their boat and cover their expenses for 2 years, and
provide “safety money” that they would use upon return from
vacation while looking for a new job. When participants begin
negotiating this exercise, there seems to be no viable bargaining
range, however, because the oil executives are authorized to pay
only up to $500,000. The parties can overcome this problem by
adding other issues to the agreement. For example, the oil
executive could offer the sellers a job upon return from vacation
or offer to pay for their gas and boat maintenance during the
2-year trip. The promise of a job offer, for example, alleviates
the need for the “safety money” and the station owner can sell
for as low as $486,250. Nonintegrative agreements in this
exercise were those in which the sale price was the sole issue,
and no other issue was included. These agreements did not
satisfy the station owner’s interests maximally (e.g., their need
for a job after their vacation) or the oil executive’s interests
maximally (e.g., their need for good managers). Integrative
agreements were those that included additional issues such as a
job offer upon return from vacation.
For the negotiation over the sale of a syndicated television show,
the negotiable issues were broken up into three types. First, distributive issues were ones on which each side had opposing preferences. For example, the sales representatives wanted to sell for
as high a price as possible, but buyers wanted to buy it for as little
as possible, and the price was equally important to each side.
Second, tradable issues were those in which buyers and sellers had
opposing preferences, but placed different values on them; therefore, they could trade concessions on one issue for gains on
another. For example, for buyers, financing terms were less valuable than the number of times shows would air; for sales representatives the opposite was true. Therefore, parties could increase
joint gains by trading a high number of airings per show for larger

payments up front. Finally, compatible issues were ones in which
participants’ preferences were perfectly aligned with the other
party. For example, both parties benefited if the sales representative sold an additional show to the buyer, as long as the price was
within the specified bargaining range.
For the negotiation that involved a dispute between a real estate
developer and a carpentry contractor, the heart of the dispute was
the amount the developer would pay the contractor for his work on
a condominium complex. A second issue was that the real estate
developer had loaned the contractor money years ago, and the
developer would now like to call the loan. However, the only way
the contractor can pay off the loan is by selling his own house at
a loss. A third issue was that the contractor’s business was leasing
a building from the developer, but 2 months ago the contractor
exercised an option to terminate the lease because he had found a
building with a cheaper rent. Since then, that alternative building
has become unavailable, and the contractor would like to renew the
lease with the developer. A final issue was that the contractor was
2 months behind in rent due to a clerical error. Dyads could
increase the integrative nature of the agreement in a few ways. For
example, the developer could allow the contractor to continue
leasing space, hire the contractor for any future work, help the
contractor secure a condominium in which to live (if the contractor
sold the house), invest in the contractor’s house (if the contractor
did not sell the house). Distributive outcomes were based primarily
on how well the participant performed on the more important
issues (e.g., how much was paid to the contractor for the condominium work, and whether the developer called the $200,000
loan), and then by less important issues in the case of a tie (e.g., the
rental rate for the contractor’s space).
Received March 12, 2007
Revision received August 15, 2007
Accepted August 28, 2007 䡲

