 Emotions in Bargaining 1 Running head: EMOTIONS IN BARGAINING A Social Functional Approach to Emotions in Bargaining: When Communicating Anger Pays and when it Backfires Eric van Dijk Gerben A. van Kleef Leiden University University of Amsterdam Wolfgang Steinel Ilja van Beest Leiden University Leiden University Full reference: Van Dijk, E., Van Kleef, G. A., Steinel, W., & Van Beest, I. (2008). A social functional approach to emotions in bargaining: When communicating anger pays and when it backfires. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 600-614. Note: This article may not exactly replicate the final version published in the APA journal. It is not the copy of record. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Eric van Dijk, Leiden University - Institute for Psychological Research, Department of Social and Organizational Emotions in Bargaining 2 Abstract Previous research on the communication of emotions suggested that bargainers obtain higher outcomes if they communicate anger than if they communicate happiness, because anger signals higher limits which in turn leads opponents to give in. Building on a social functional account of communicated emotions, we demonstrate that the behavioral consequences of communicated anger strongly depend on structural characteristics of the bargaining situation. The results of three experimental studies on ultimatum bargaining corroborate the notion that communicated anger signals higher limits, and that emotion effects are contingent on bargainers’ expectation that low offers will be rejected. The data also indicate, however, that communicating anger in bargaining may backfire. The findings suggest that bargainers who communicate anger may obtain lower outcomes (a) when their opponent has a possibility to deceive them during bargaining, and (b) when the consequences of rejecting their opponent’s offer are low. Taken together, the current article reveals the boundary conditions of successful communication of anger in bargaining. Keywords: emotions, bargaining, deception, fairness, self-interest  Emotions in Bargaining 3 A Social Functional Approach to Emotions in Bargaining: When Communicating Anger Pays and when it Backfires Bargaining can be described as "the process whereby two or more parties attempt to settle what each shall give and take, or perform and receive, in a transaction between them" (Rubin & Brown, 1975, p. 2). Whereas this definition adequately captures the fact that bargaining is a mixed-motive situation (Komorita & Parks, 1996; Pruitt & Carnevale, 1993), it may not adequately capture how bargainers perceive the situation they are in. For one thing, it does not acknowledge that bargaining is often a highly emotional and heated process. During bargaining, for example, bargainers may become angry. How do emotions affect the bargaining process and outcomes? Remarkably, the role of emotions--which seems so central to situations of conflict--has only received limited attention in the bargaining literature. In the current article, we focus on the interpersonal effects of communicated emotions in bargaining. More specifically, we investigate how communicated emotions convey information about one’s limits during bargaining, and how these inferences subsequently translate into behavior. Interpersonal Effects of Emotions Our research and analysis of emotions in bargaining is rooted in the social functional analysis of emotions (e.g., Frijda, 1994; Keltner & Haidt, 1999). In the context of Emotions in Bargaining 4 emotions implies that bargainers will take this information as a basis for their own bargaining behavior if it is functional for them to do so. Thus, a social functional account of interpersonal effects of emotions in bargaining assumes that (a) communicated emotions lead to informational inferences, and (b) these informational inferences have behavioral consequences. Of the interpersonal emotions during bargaining, anger has received most attention. The basic question that researchers have addressed is whether anger has disruptive or perhaps positive effects in bargaining (e.g., Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006; Van Kleef, De Dreu & Manstead, 2004a, b). The results of these studies provided support for the social functions approach described above. Van Kleef et al. (2004a, b), for example, compared how bargainers reacted to an angry opponent and to a happy opponent. For this purpose, they presented their participants a negotiation task, in which they could make the first offer. Subsequently, their (simulated) opponent made a preprogrammed counteroffer, after which participants made a new offer, and the negotiation process continued. During six rounds of offers and counteroffers, participants received emotional reactions from their opponent. These reactions either signaled that the opponent was angry or happy. A series of experiments using this paradigm first of all showed that bargainers tended to reciprocate the emotions of their opponent (cf. Keltner & Haidt, 1999; this reciprocal  Emotions in Bargaining 5 competitive when feeling angry (e.g., Baron, 1990; Pillutla & Murnighan, 1996; Forgas, 1998). In contrast to this notion, however, the studies by Van Kleef et al. (2004a, b) did not reveal such detrimental effects. The studies did, however, provide support for the social functional account of interpersonal effects of emotions. Supporting the notion that that communicated emotions are used as a basis for informational inferences, the findings indicated that bargainers used their opponents’ emotion to infer his or her limits. In agreement with the notion that anger may convey a sense of toughness (e.g., Clark, Pataki, & Carver, 1996; Karasawa, 2001; Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006), the findings indicated that the limits of angry opponents were judged to be higher than the limits of happy opponents. In addition, the studies showed the behavioral consequences of this process by revealing that the participants made lower demands and higher concessions to an angry opponent than to a happy opponent. Moreover, the effects of the opponent’s emotion on the demands of the participants were mediated by the perceived limits of their opponent. This suggests that people give in to angry opponents because they assume that the limits of angry opponents are higher. People may then reason that agreement can only be reached if they concede (see also Frank, 1988). Based on these findings--that basically demonstrate that showing anger pays--one might conclude that a good advice for any bargainer would be to communicate anger. Emotions in Bargaining 6 argue that the behavioral consequences may be more differentiated. Moreover, we suggest that the behavioral consequences strongly depend on structural aspects of the bargaining situation. Our basic argument is that communicated anger--and the high limits it signals--may only lead to lower demands if the structural aspects of the bargaining situation lead bargainers to infer that conceding to the high limits is the only way to secure outcomes. We will show that structural aspects of the bargaining situation may provide bargainers with alternative means to further their own outcomes without necessarily giving in to the opponent’s high limits. Building on previous insights on structural effects in bargaining, we will demonstrate that the behavioral effects of communicated emotions strongly depend on the structural differences between the parties involved in terms of (a) the distribution of information and (b) the distribution of power. The distribution of information refers to the knowledge that bargainers have about the object of the negotiation (e.g., Roth & Malouf, 1992; Samuelson, 1984). The distribution of power refers to the influence that bargainers have on each other’s outcomes, with high influence implying high power (e.g., Emerson, 1972a, b; Lawler, 1992). In the following we will argue and demonstrate that if the bargaining structure provides bargainers with an information advantage over their opponent and allows for an Emotions in Bargaining 7 To examine the structural effects of information and power distributions we used a bargaining context that is commonly used to investigate motivated bargaining behavior. The ultimatum bargaining game was developed by Güth, Schmittberger, and Schwarze (1982), and basically models the final phase of bargaining, i.e., where bargainers make a ‘take it or leave it’ offer to their opponent. In this game, two players decide on how to distribute a certain amount of money. One of the players, the allocator, offers a proportion of the money to the other player, the recipient. If the recipient accepts, the money is distributed in agreement with the allocator's offer. If the recipient rejects the offer, both players get nothing. With its simple structure, the ultimatum bargaining game is very suited to study motivated bargaining behavior, and the structural effects we address in the current paper, the distribution of information and power. That the may strongly affect motivated bargaining behavior has been demonstrated in a series of studies that were basically designed to test whether or not bargainers truly care about fairness. The first experiments on ultimatum bargaining demonstrated that allocators predominantly offer an equal split to the recipient, so that recipient and allocator end up with an equal amount of money (see for overviews e.g. Camerer & Thaler, 1995; Güth & Tietz, 1990; Handgraaf, Van Dijk, & De Cremer, 2004; Thaler, 1988; Van Dijk & Tenbrunsel, 2005). Initially this preference for an equal split was Emotions in Bargaining 8 were worth twice as much to the allocator than to the recipient. In half of the conditions (the symmetric information conditions) the allocators were informed that the recipient also knew about this differential value. In these conditions, allocators tended to compensate for the differential value, by frequently offering twice as many chips to the recipient than to themselves. In the other half of the conditions (the asymmetric information conditions), the allocators learned that the recipient did know about the differential value. In this case, allocators do not necessarily have to fear that low offers will be rejected. Because the recipient does not know about the differential value, one can offer to split the chips equally--a seemingly fair offer--without much fear of rejection. In agreement with the suggestion that equal offers that were observed in prior studies on ultimatum bargaining may have been motivated by fear of rejection of unfair offers, results indicated that participants made lower offers if they believed the recipient was not aware of the fact that chips were worth more to the allocator (see for similar findings e.g. Kagel, Kim, & Moser, 1996; Pillutla & Murnighan, 1995; Straub & Murnighan, 1995). In addition to manipulations of information (symmetric vs. asymmetric) other studies manipulated the between the allocator and recipient by varying the consequences of rejection. For example, Suleiman (1996) designed a variant of the ultimatum bargaining game, in which the consequences of rejection can be varied (see also Van Dijk, Emotions in Bargaining 9 2000). For example, in the case of delta = 0.9, rejection means that the offer is only diminished by 10%, implying that the recipient is in a low power position relative to the allocator. With this variant of ultimatum bargaining, Suleiman demonstrated that as the consequences of rejection are reduced and the power position of the recipient is weakened (i.e., when delta goes up), offers go down. What these studies show, is that both the distribution of information and the distribution of power strongly affect bargaining behavior, and that the ultimatum bargaining game is highly suited to investigate the behavioral effects of such structural factors. More specifically, the studies indicate that these structural aspects of the bargaining situation affect how bargainers may deal with their opponent’s limits. Bargainers having an information advantage and/or facing a low power opponent may be less inclined to give in to the (inferred) high limits of an angry opponent. For the current purposes these insights are of special importance, because they imply that the behavioral consequences of communicating anger may be different from what the current literature would suggest, and that communicating anger may not always be an effective strategy to increase one’s outcomes in bargaining. The Present Studies We investigate effects of communicated emotions within the context of ultimatum  Emotions in Bargaining 10 structural characteristics of the bargaining situation. More specifically Experiment 1 will demonstrate that fear of rejection may induce allocators to give in to an angry recipient, and thus that communicating anger may pay. Experiment 2 will show that if the bargaining situation allows for exchange of information, allocators may use deception as a strategic means to actively reduce the angry recipient’s limits. The results will show that under these conditions, communicating anger backfires. In Experiment 3 we manipulated power by varying consequences of rejection. The results will show that communicating anger is detrimental to recipients in a low power position. Under these conditions, communicating anger backfires because allocators do not need to fear (inferred) high limits of the angry opponent when the consequences of rejection are low. Taken together, these studies shed new light on the functionality of anger communication in bargaining by extending and qualifying previous findings and theorizing in the realm of the social functional account of emotions. Experiment 1: You may be angry but what do you know? As a starting point of our investigations we developed an ultimatum bargaining game along the lines of previous research on asymmetric information (e.g., Van Dijk & Vermunt, 2000). Concentrating on allocator behavior, participants were assigned the allocator role, and they were informed that chips were worth twice as much to them as to the recipient (cf. Van Dijk & Vermunt, 2000). Half of the participants learned that the recipient knew about this Emotions in Bargaining 11 (simulated) opponents either communicated that they were angry or happy about the offer, and the main interest was in how this affected subsequent offers. Such a procedure would not be feasible in ultimatum bargaining, however, because in ultimatum bargaining allocators only make one (take it or leave it) offer. Therefore, we adjusted the procedure, by having the participants fill out a general six-item questionnaire to supposedly assess their general views on bargaining. Their answers were supposedly sent to the recipient who then either reacted with anger or happiness. This slight adjustment not only sufficed to include a meaningful manipulation of emotion in ultimatum bargaining, it also served to remedy a potential limitation of the emotion manipulation of the Van Kleef et al. studies. One could argue that in the Van Kleef et al. studies, the manipulation of emotion also constitutes a manipulation of how attractive the offer is to the opponent. That is, by responding in anger, the opponent basically states that the offer itself is highly unacceptable. By decoupling the emotion manipulation from the actual offer, this alternative interpretation seems less viable. Our first interest was in whether we would replicate the informational and behavioral findings that have been documented in earlier negotiation research (e.g., Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006; Van Kleef, 2004a, b). Would similar effects of emotion be observed in ultimatum bargaining? And would they be as evident in the case of symmetric information as in the case of asymmetric information? We anticipated two possibilities. The first possibility was that we Emotions in Bargaining 12 chips in the symmetric conditions than in the asymmetric information conditions (Kagel et al., 1996; Pillutla & Murnighan, 1995; Straub & Murnighan, 1995; Van Dijk & Vermunt, 2000). An alternative possibility would be that participants in the asymmetric information condition are reluctant to ‘take advantage’ of their information advantage when being confronted with a happy opponent. In that case we should replicate the findings of Van Kleef et al. (2004a) in the symmetric information conditions (i.e., higher offers to the angry opponent than to the happy opponent), whereas in the asymmetric information conditions participants would offer more chips to the happy recipient than to the angry recipient. The study used a 2 (Emotions: angry vs. happy) × 2 (Information: symmetric vs. asymmetric) between-participants factorial design. The participants, 114 students (42 males; 72 females) at Leiden University (mean age = 20.1 years), participated voluntarily. At the start of the instructions, the participants were informed that they would participate in a study on bargaining, and that they were paired with one of the other participants. Members of each dyad would be referred to as person X and Y. All participants learned that they were assigned the letter X. Emotions in Bargaining 13 the person that they would bargain with. The fact that answers were sent to the opponent was explained by pointing out that in reality people often have some information about the other party. Participants then received the explanation of the ultimatum bargaining situation. All participants learned that they, X, would bargain with Y over the distribution of 100 chips; 1 chip was said to be worth 10 Euro cents to the allocator (person X) and 5 Euro cents to the recipient (person Y) (1 Euro equaled $1.20 at the time of the experiment). In all conditions, participants learned that they could make an offer for the distribution of the chips to the recipient. If the recipient would accept the offer, the chips would be divided accordingly. If the recipient rejected the offer, neither the recipient nor the allocator would receive any chips. In the asymmetric information conditions, participants were informed that the recipient did not know about the differential value, and that the recipient only knew that that chips were worth 5 cent to the recipient. In the symmetric information conditions participants learned that the recipient did know about the differential value of the chips. After explaining the bargaining situation, the manipulation of the recipient’s emotion was induced. Participants learned that meanwhile the recipient had typed a reaction after reading the participant’s six answers to the bargaining statements. It was stressed that when  Emotions in Bargaining 14 Subsequently, participants made their offer to the recipient. In addition, we asked some manipulation checks, and assessed the emotions (anger and happiness) that participants ascribed to the recipients, as well as to themselves. Furthermore, we assessed the limits that participants ascribed to their opponent by asking them the minimum number of chips that the recipient would need to accept their offer, and we asked them how likely it would be that the recipient would accept their offer. At the end of the experiment, participants were thoroughly debriefed and paid 6 Euro. All participants agreed to this procedure. To check the manipulation of recipient’s emotion two questions were posed about the perceived emotion of the recipient (cf. Van Kleef et al., 2004a). We asked participants to what extent the recipient was angry (1 = 7 = and to what extent the recipient was happy (1 = 7 = A 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) × 2 (Information) Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) on the anger ratings only yielded a main effect of emotion (F(1, 110) = 519.61, p < .0001, η 2 = .83), indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions judged the recipients to be more angry (M = 5.81, SD = 1.37) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M = 1.30, SD = 0.57). Emotions in Bargaining = All participants answered this question correctly. These findings suggest that our manipulations of recipient’s emotion and information were successful. A 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) × 2 (Information) ANOVA yielded main effects for recipient’s emotion (F(1, 110) = 6.86, p < .01, η 2 = .06) and information (F(1, 110) = 18.43, p < .0001, η 2 = .14). The emotion main effect indicated that the participants offered more chips to the angry recipient (M = 57.65, SD = 8.13) than to the happy recipient (M = 53.67, SD = 9.76). The main effect of information indicated that the participants offered more chips to the recipient in the symmetric information conditions (M = 58.98, SD = 8.44) than in the asymmetric conditions (M = 52.33, SD = 8.70). No interaction was observed (F(1, 110) = .88, To assess the perceived limit of the recipient, we asked the participants how many chips they expected that the recipient should be offered to accept. A 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) × 2 (Information) ANOVA on this measure only yielded main effects of recipient’s emotion (F(1, 110) = 12.54, p < .001, η 2 = .10) and information (F(1, 110) = 37.65, p < .0001, η 2 = .26). The recipient’s emotion main effect indicated that the participants expected a higher Emotions in Bargaining 16 behavior due to their influence on the perception of the other’s limits. In agreement with this notion, we observed a significant correlation between offers and the perceived recipient’s limit (r = .47, p < .0001). To assess whether perceived limits mediated the reported effects of the recipient’s emotion on the ultimatum offers, we performed a series of regressions (cf. Baron & Kenny, 1986). For mediation, three conditions must be satisfied. First, the independent variables (recipient’s emotion and information) should significantly affect the dependent variable (offer). Second, the independent variables should significantly affect the proposed mediator (perceived recipient’s limit). Third, to establish full mediation, the effects of the independent variables on the dependent variable should become nonsignificant after controlling for the mediator. As our ANOVA findings on the offer already showed, the first condition was met by showing main effects for information and emotion (for information, β = -.37, p < .0001; for emotion, β = -.23, p < .01; R 2 = .19). The two main effects on the perceived recipient’s limit show that the second condition was also satisfied (for information, β = -.48, p < .0001; for emotion, β = -.28, p < .001; R 2 = .32). Finally, the results of our regression analyses showed that after inclusion of the perceived recipient’s limit, the effect of perceived recipient’s limit was highly significant (β = .36, p = .001), whereas the effect of emotion became nonsignificant (β = -.13, p = .14.), and the effect of information was reduced to β = -.20, p =  Emotions in Bargaining we asked participants whether they felt angry and happy. A 2 × 2 ANOVA on the anger ratings yielded only a main effect of recipient’s emotion (F(1, 110) = 65.59, p < .0001, η 2 = .37), indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions reported being more angry (M = 2.96, SD = 1.69) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M = 1.11, SD = .31). A 2 × 2 ANOVA on the happiness ratings yielded only a main effect for recipient’s emotion (F(1, 110) = 128.03, p < .0001, η 2 = .54), indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions reported being less happy (M = 2.82, SD = 1.14) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M = 5.49, SD = 1.14). Taken together, these data support the notion of reciprocated emotions. After participants had made their offer, we asked them how likely it would be that the recipient would accept their offer (1 = 7 = A 2 × 2 ANOVA indicated no significant effects (M = 5.18, SD = 1.31), suggesting that participants in all conditions were equally motivated to make an offer that would be acceptable to the recipient. We will discuss the implications of this finding in more detail in the General Discussion when we compare this finding to the different pattern that emerged in Experiment 3. The results of Experiment 1 show that the manipulation of the distribution of Emotions in Bargaining 18 For the current purposes, the more interesting finding concerns the effect of other’s emotion on offers. In this respect, our findings corroborated the basic reasoning of Van Kleef et al. (2004a, b) by showing that it pays to be angry in bargaining: Participants made higher offers to an angry recipient than to a happy recipient. Thus, even though bargainers seemed to reciprocate their opponent’s emotion in the sense that participants were more angry (and less happy) when confronted with an angry recipient, their anger did not translate into lower offers. In agreement with the social functional account of emotions, the results of the mediation analysis suggested that the process by which communicated emotions affected bargaining at least partly runs via perceived limits. Bargainers ascribed higher limits to angry opponents, and accommodated to these higher limits by offering them a better deal. It thus appeared that our current manipulation of emotion had similar effects as the emotion manipulation used by Van Kleef et al. (2004, a, b). Note that the giving in to an angry opponent was also observed in the asymmetric information conditions, and that we thus found a main effect of recipient’s emotion on offers. The data on the perceived limits and the mediation analysis show why: As in the symmetric information conditions, participants in the asymmetric information conditions expected higher limits from the angry recipient. From this, we may conclude that participants still feared that low offers were more likely to be rejected by angry opponents than by happy  Emotions in Bargaining 19 In Experiment 2, we replicated the basic design of Experiment 1, such that participants were either confronted with an angry recipient or a happy recipient. And as in Experiment 1, chips were worth twice as much to the allocator as to the recipient, and information was manipulated as in Experiment 1. The main difference was that we changed the structure of the bargaining situation. We now allowed for additional communication by asking the participants to send a message to the recipient prior to making their offer. They could either (correctly) inform the recipient that chips were worth 10 cents to the allocator, or (incorrectly) inform them that chips were worth 5 cents to the allocator. With this added opportunity, participants could now actively deceive the recipient. Lewicki and Stark (1996, p. 78) defined deception as an activity that “manipulates the opponent’s logical and inferential processes, in order to lead the opponent to an incorrect conclusion or deduction.” Based on our social functional account of interpersonal emotions, and the apparent importance of the perceived limits for the offers, we reasoned that in this bargaining context deception will be used to affect the recipient’s limits. Of course, this added opportunity for information exchange should not have a strong impact on allocations in the symmetric information conditions, because there it would seem unlikely that participants would send incorrect information knowing that the recipient was fully aware of the value difference. Our main interest was in how participants in the asymmetric information Emotions in Bargaining 20 conditions would be especially likely to deceive the angry opponent, because deception offers the possibility to reduce the opponent’s limits. In previous research, Steinel and De Dreu (2004) have shown that people may be more likely to deceive others when they fear exploitation by these others, for instance if they expect that their opponent is competitive (see also Pruitt & Kimmel, 1979; Rubin, Pruitt, & Kim, 1994). In a similar vein, we expect people to be more likely to resort to deception if they anticipate that their opponent may have high limits. To assess whether people use deception to lower their opponent’s limits, we also assessed what limits the participants expected from their opponent after the information exchange. With regard to the offers, we anticipated that with the opportunity for deception, participants in the asymmetric information conditions would subsequently make lower offers to the angry recipient than to the happy recipient. After all, if participants would indeed be more deceitful towards the angry recipient in order to lower the recipient’s limits, they could subsequently make the recipient lower offers without having to fear that these would be rejected. The study used a 2 (Recipient’s Emotion: angry vs. happy) × 2 (Information: symmetric vs. asymmetric) between-participants factorial design. The participants, 106 Emotions in Bargaining 21 informed that they could send a brief message to Y. The rationale that we offered was that in reality there is often some kind of communication in bargaining. They were asked to indicate to the recipient how much they would receive for each chip. They could either inform Y that they received 5 cents or that they received 10 cents. Note that a message of 10 cents would be correct, and that a message of 5 cents would be incorrect. After participants had sent the information, we assessed the importance of the fear of rejection motive by asking them to what extent it had been important for them--when sending the information--that they wanted to avoid that the recipient would reject their offer (1 = 7 = After this, participants were asked to indicate their offer. The dependent measures were similar to the measures of Experiment 1. In addition, we now assessed the importance of the fear of rejection motive by asking them to what extent it had been important for them-- when making the offer--that they wanted to avoid that the recipient would reject their offer (1 = 7 = At the end of the experiment, participants were thoroughly debriefed and paid 6 Euro. All participants agreed to this procedure. As in Experiment 1, we checked the manipulation of recipient’s Emotions in Bargaining 22 A 2 × 2 ANOVA on the perceived happiness ratings only yielded a main effect for recipient’s emotion (F(1, 102) = 530.86, p < .0001, η 2 = .84), indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions judged the recipients as being less happy (M = 1.57, SD = .86) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M = 5.90, SD = 1.05). To check our manipulation of information, we asked our participants whether, before the sending of the information, their opponent knew that chips were worth twice as much to X than to Y (1 = 2 = All participants answered this question correctly. Participants could either correctly inform the recipient that chips were worth 10 cents to them, or incorrectly inform them that chips were worth 5 cents. Not surprisingly, all participants in the symmetric information conditions correctly informed the recipient that chips were worth 10 cents to them. Of course we were primarily interested in the information participants sent in the asymmetric information condition. Interestingly, and in agreement with our predictions, the data indicated that participants more often sent incorrect information to the angry recipient (17 out of 26: 65.4 %) than to the happy recipient (9 out of 26: 34.6%; χ 2 (N = 106) = 4.92, p < .04). Emotions in Bargaining  conditions (M = 52.23, SD = 8.68). The interaction effect corroborated our reasoning. Table 1 shows that in the symmetric conditions, participants offered more chips to the angry recipient than to the happy recipient (F(1, 102) = 2.91, p = .09). In the asymmetric conditions the reversed pattern was observed: participants offered fewer chips to the angry recipient than to the happy recipient (F(1, 102) = 5.43, p < .05). As in Experiment 1, we assessed the perceived limit of the recipient. After participants had sent the information to the recipient and subsequently made their offer, we asked them how many chips they expected the recipient should be offered to accept. A 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) × 2 (Information) ANOVA on this number yielded an information main effect (F(1, 102) = 10.55, p < .01, η 2 = .09), indicating that the perceived limit was higher in the symmetric information conditions (M = 59.02, SD = 13.78) than in the asymmetric information conditions (M = 51.40, SD = 10.39). More important for the current purposes, the main effect of information was qualified by a significant Recipient’s Emotion × Information interaction (F(1, 102) = 8.19, p < .01, η 2 = .07). As Table 2 shows, in the asymmetric information condition, participants ascribed a lower limit to the angry recipient than to the happy recipient (F(1, 102) = 8.95, p < .01). This finding of low perceived limits for the angry recipient in the asymmetric Emotions in Bargaining 24 hoc analysis on the perceived limit in the asymmetric information conditions, using the information that participants sent (correct vs. incorrect) as a post hoc factor. A 2 (Information Sent) × 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) ANOVA on the perceived limit only yielded a main effect for information sent (F(1, 48) = 19.89, p < .0001, η 2 = .29). After sending the information, participants who sent incorrect information indeed estimated the limit of the recipient to be lower (M = 45.69, SD = 8.53) than did participants who sent correct information (M = 57.12, SD = 8.92), which is in agreement with the view that the purpose of sending incorrect information is to lower the recipient’s limit. As in Experiment 1, we observed a significant correlation between offers and the perceived recipient’s limit (r = .66, p < .0001). To assess whether perceived limits mediated the effects of our manipulations on the ultimatum offers, we again performed a series of regressions to test for mediation. We tested (1) whether the independent variables (recipient’s emotion and information) significantly affected the offer, (2) whether the independent variables significantly affected the perceived recipient’s limit, and (3) whether the effects of the independent variables on the offer became nonsignificant after controlling for the perceived recipient’s limit. All three conditions were satisfied. As our ANOVA findings on the offer already Emotions in Bargaining 25 effect of perceived limits was highly significant (β = .60, p = .0001), whereas the effects of information and the interaction became nonsignificant (for information, β = .14, p = .07; for the interaction, β = -.11, p = .15; R 2 = .47). Sobel tests indicated that the reduction was significant for information (Z = 2.98, p < .001) and for the interaction (Z = -2.67, p < .01). The participants made two decisions in which fear of rejection might play an important role: The sending of the information, and the making of their subsequent offer. After each of these decisions, we assessed the importance of the fear of rejection motive for that decision. By treating these two measures as the two levels of a within-participants factor Decision, we were able to assess the relative importance of the fear of rejection motive for both decisions. A 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) × 2 (Information) × 2 (Decision: sending information vs. making offer) ANOVA with repeated measures on the last factor only yielded a highly significant three-way interaction (F(1, 102) = 17.92, p < .0001, η 2 = .29). The relevant cell means for the three-way interaction are presented in Table 3. To interpret this interaction, we first take a look at the data regarding the It is important to acknowledge that the data regarding the sending of information in the symmetric information constitute a special case, since all participants in this condition (understandably) sent correct information to the recipient. The scores in these conditions may Emotions in Bargaining 26 which fits with the notion that people especially fear that angry recipients are likely to reject. It is interesting to see, however, that the pattern drastically changes once participants have sent the information. As the data on the importance of the fear of rejection motive when show, participants in the asymmetric information conditions did not seem to be that occupied with the possibility that the recipient might reject their offer. To the contrary, the fear of rejection motive even tended to be less important for people facing the angry recipient (M = 4.42, SD = 1.90) than for participants facing the happy recipient (M = 5.08, SD = 1.44), F(1, 102) = 4.53, p = .04. This finding can easily be understood if one realizes that participants apparently deduced that after sending incorrect information there was no need anymore to anticipate that the angry (but deceived) recipient would reject the offer. The fact that the importance of the fear of rejection motive for making the offer was considered to be higher by participants facing an angry recipient in the symmetric condition (M = 5.36, SD = 1.55) than by participants facing an angry recipient in the asymmetric condition (M = 4.42, SD = 1.90); F(1, 102) = 3.87, p = .05) corroborates this interpretation. As in Experiment 1, we asked participants whether they felt angry and happy. A 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) × 2 (Information) ANOVA on the anger ratings yielded only a main effect of recipient’s emotion (F(1, 102) = 47.72, p < .0001, η 2 = .32), Emotions in Bargaining bargainers reciprocate their opponent’s emotions. As in Experiment 1, we asked participants, after they had made their offer, how likely it would be that the recipient would accept their offer (1 = 7 = A 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) × 2 (Information) ANOVA indicated no significant effects (M = 5.23, SD = 1.40), suggesting that participants in all conditions were equally motivated to make an offer that would be acceptable to the recipient. This finding, which corresponds to the findings we obtained in Experiment 1, will be discussed in more detail in the General Discussion when comparing it to the different pattern we obtained in Experiment 3. The findings provide strong support for our reasoning that (a) emotion effects are contingent upon their effect on the perceived limits and fear of rejection, and (b) when fear of rejection is removed, communicating anger may backfire in the sense that angry bargainers may end up with lower outcomes. In addition to evidence suggesting that bargainers reciprocated their opponent’s emotions, the behavioral data showed that our participants were more deceptive towards angry bargainers. Fear of rejection appears to play a central role here. By deceiving the angry opponent, people may lower the limits of their opponent, which ‘allows’ them to make low offers without having to fear the consequences. Conversely, by Emotions in Bargaining 28 The results of Experiment 2 suggest that the participants strived to get their offers accepted, and that in their “getting to yes” (cf. Fisher & Ury, 1981) they strategically tried to lower the limits of especially the angry opponent. It thus seems that in the pursuit of getting one’s offer accepted, people may turn to deception when confronted with anger. The recipient’s impact in the ultimatum game pertains to what would happen if he or she rejected the allocator’s offers. As we noted, in the typical ultimatum bargaining study, the consequences of rejection of the offer are high because rejection leaves the allocator empty- handed. In such a setting, allocators may (rightfully) fear the consequences of having their offer rejected. But what would happen if the consequences of the recipient’s rejection of the offer are less severe? What if outcomes can be secured even when hearing a “no?” As we mentioned in the general introduction, it is possible to manipulate the relative power position of allocator and recipient in the ultimatum bargaining context by varying the consequences of rejection. In the delta bargaining game, rejection of the offer means that the offer is multiplied with a factor delta (0 ≤ delta ≤ 1). With higher values of delta, the consequences of rejection become less severe (Suleiman, 1996; Van Dijk et al., 2004). An interesting implication is that when the consequences of rejection are low, one no longer has to fear an angry recipient’s reaction. Whereas it may still be true that anger communicates higher limits, the limit itself may thus become less essential in the bargaining process. Simply  Emotions in Bargaining 29 In Experiment 3 we thus manipulated the consequences of rejection by manipulating delta, and again manipulated the communicated emotions of the recipient. Our main interest was to see whether, if the consequences of rejection were low, participants would make lower offers to the angry recipient than to the happy recipient. Because fear of rejection and perceived limits have played an important role in our reasoning thus far, we also measured these constructs. The study used a 2 (Recipient’s Emotion: angry vs. happy) × 2 (Consequences of Rejection: low vs. high) between-participants factorial design. The participants, 103 students at Leiden University (mean age = 20.8 years; 22 males, 81 females), participated voluntarily. The procedure resembled the procedures of Experiments 1 and 2, including the manipulation of recipient’s emotion (angry vs. happy). After this manipulation, all participants learned that they, X, would bargain with Y over the distribution of 100 chips; 1 chip was said to be worth .05 Euro. In all conditions, participants learned that they would make an offer to Y by indicating how they wanted the 100 chips to be allocated. If Y agreed to the division, the chips would be distributed accordingly. In the high consequences Emotions in Bargaining 30 the limits that participants ascribed to the recipient, the likelihood that the recipient would accept their offer, and how important it had been for them that the recipient could reject their offer. At the end of the experiment, participants were thoroughly debriefed and paid 6 Euro. All participants agreed to this procedure. To check the manipulation of recipient’s emotion two questions were posed about the perceived emotion of the recipient. We asked participants to what extent the recipient was angry and to what extent the recipient was happy. A 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) × 2 (Consequences of Rejection) ANOVA on the anger ratings only yielded a main effect of recipient’s emotion (F(1, 99) = 646.90, p < .0001, η 2 = .87), indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions judged the recipients as being more angry (M = 5.92, SD = 1.22) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M = 1.24, SD = 0.51). A 2 × 2 ANOVA on the perceived happiness ratings only yielded a main effect of recipient’s emotion (F(1, 99) = 870.24, p < .0001, η 2 = .90), indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions judged the recipients as being less happy (M = 1.52, SD = 0.67) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M = 6.12, SD = 0.89). To check our manipulation of consequences of rejection, we asked our participants Emotions in Bargaining 31 measure only yielded a consequences of rejection main effect (F(1, 99) = 43.31, p < .0001, η 2 = .30), indicating that participants in the high consequences conditions (M = 4.02, SD = 1.71) felt that the potential impact of the recipient was higher than did participants in the low consequences condition (M = 1.88, SD = 1.86). These findings suggest that our manipulations of recipient’s emotion and consequences of rejection were successful. A 2 (Recipient’s Emotion) × 2 (Consequences of Rejection) ANOVA yielded main effects for consequences of rejection (F(1, 99) = 18.91, p < .0001, η 2 = .16) and emotion (F(1, 99) = 10.21, p < .01, η 2 = .09). The main effect of consequences of rejection indicated that the participants offered more chips to the recipient in the high consequences conditions (M = 47.59, SD = 6.04) than in the low consequences conditions (M = 38.76, SD = 14.59). The emotion main effect indicated that the participants offered fewer chips to the angry recipient (M = 40.33, SD = 14.41) that to the happy recipient (M = 46.51, SD = 7.17). These two main effects were qualified, however, by a significant Recipient’s Emotion × Consequences of Rejection interaction (F(1, 99) = 9.74, p < .01, η 2 = .09). The cell means are depicted in Table 4. In agreement with our predictions, the table shows that participants offered fewer chips to an angry recipient when the consequence of rejection were low than Emotions in Bargaining .05). As in Experiments 1 and 2, we asked the participants about the likelihood that the recipient would accept their offer (1 = 7 = A 2 × 2 ANOVA indicated significant main effects of recipient’s emotion (F(1, 99) = 22.84, p < .0001, η 2 = .19) and consequences of rejection (F(1, 99) = 17.73, p < .0001, η 2 = .16), that were qualified by a significant Recipient’s Emotion × Consequences of Rejection interaction (F(1, 99) = 6.82, p < .01, η 2 = .06). As Table 5 shows, especially participants in the angry recipient and low consequences condition anticipated a low likelihood of acceptance. Tukey HSD tests (p < .05) indicated that the anticipated likelihood of acceptance was significantly lower in this cell than in each of the other cells (ps < .05). Apparently the participants did anticipate the possibility that the low offer they made would be rejected, which accords with the notion that bargainers may be less concerned with getting to yes when the consequences of rejection are low. We asked participants to what extent the fact that the recipient had the possibility to reject their offer had affected their decision (1 = 7 = A 2 × 2 ANOVA only revealed a main effect of consequences of rejection (F(1, 99) = 18.03, p < Emotions in Bargaining 33 × 2 (Consequences of Rejection) ANOVA on this number only yielded a main effect of recipient’s emotion (F(1, 99) = 4.71, p < .04, η 2 = .05), indicating that participants believed that the angry recipient’s limit (M = 49.37, SD = 11.04) was higher than the happy recipient’s limit (M = 45.14, SD = 8.24). As in Experiments 1 and 2, we asked participants whether they felt angry and happy. A 2 × 2 ANOVA on the anger ratings yielded only a main effect of recipient’s emotion (F(1, 99) = 61.71, p < .0001, η 2 = .38), indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions reported being more angry (M = 3.29, SD = 1.94) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M = 1.14, SD = .35). A 2 × 2 ANOVA on the happiness ratings yielded a main effect of recipient’s emotion (F(1, 99) = 123.42, p < .0001, η 2 = .56), indicating that participants in the angry recipient conditions reported being less happy (M = 3.06, SD = 1.41) than did participants in the happy recipient conditions (M = 5.63, SD = 1.22). In addition, we also observed a main effect of consequences of rejection (F(1, 99) = 4.46, p < .05, η 2 = .04), indicating that participants reported being a bit more happy when the consequences of having their offer rejected would be low (M = 4.24, SD = 1.91) than when the consequences were high (M = 3.74, SD = 1.89). Emotions in Bargaining 34 would be mediated by the participants’ anger 2 , but primarily so when the consequences of rejection were low. This means that we anticipated mediated moderation (Baron & Kenny, 1986; Muller, Judd, & Yzerbyt, 2005). We tested whether the three conditions needed for establishing mediated moderation were satisfied (Muller et al., 2005) by testing (1) whether our independent variables (delta, recipient’s emotion, and their interaction) affected the offers, (2) whether they affected the participants’ anger (i.e., the mediator), and (3) whether after inclusion of the interaction between the consequences of rejection and participants’ anger, the reported Consequences of Rejection × Recipient’s Emotion interaction would become nonsignificant. As our ANOVA findings on the offer already showed, the first condition was met by showing significant effects of consequences of rejection, emotion and the Consequences of Rejection × Recipient’s Emotion interaction (for consequences of rejection, β = -.37, p < .0001; for recipient’s emotion, β = .27, p < .01; for the interaction, β = .27, p < .01; R 2 = .28). The second condition was met by the significant effect for recipient’s emotion on the participants’ anger (β = -.61, p < .0001; R 2 = .41). Finally, the results of our regression analyses showed that after inclusion of the participants’ anger and the Consequences of Rejection × Participants’ Anger interaction term, the effects of participant’s anger and the Consequences of Rejection × Participants’ Anger interaction term reached significance (respectively, β = - Emotions in Bargaining 35 was mediated by the participants’ anger. A Sobel test indicated that the reduction was significant (Z = -2.28, p < .05). The results of Experiment 3 again suggest that communicating anger is not without risk. In the low consequences conditions, participants offered fewer chips to a recipient who communicated anger than to a recipient who communicated happiness. And again it appears that the consequences of rejection play an important role in shaping the effect of emotions on bargaining behavior. When the consequences of rejection were low, the participants appeared to be less bothered by the fact that the recipient might reject their offer. It is in this condition that communication of anger backfired, and led to lower offers. Moreover, as our mediation analyses showed, it appears that the process that can be held accountable for this adverse effect is that when the consequences of rejection are low, the participants ‘released’ their own anger by making low offers. It is also interesting to see that in contrast to Experiments 1 and 2, now our manipulations did affect the estimated likelihood of acceptance. As we stated in our introduction of Experiment 3, this finding is explained by the fact that we now manipulated the consequences of rejection. When the consequences of rejection are low, perceived acceptability of the offer becomes a less important determinant of bargaining behavior Emotions in Bargaining 36 did not observe such a significant difference in the condition where the consequences of rejection were high. In essence, the structure of the symmetric information conditions of Experiments 1 and 2 resembled the structure of the high consequences condition of Experiment 3 (i.e., in all these conditions both players would obtain zero outcomes if the offer would be rejected). Why then did we not observe a similar effect in Experiment 3? To understand why, one should acknowledge that there is one important difference in which the setup in Experiment 3 differed from Experiments 1 and 2: Whereas in Experiments 1 and 2 the bargaining situation was (i.e., parties bargained over the chips of value), the situation in Experiment 3 was (i.e., parties bargained over the chips of value). This observation is important because previous research and theorizing suggest that there may be more leeway in distributing scarce resources in situations of asymmetry than in situations of symmetry (e.g., Wade-Benzoni, Tenbrunsel, & Bazerman, 1996; Loewenstein & Moore, 2003). In particular, it has been argued that in situations of symmetry, equal division provides a strong anchor for decisions (cf. Allison & Messick, 1990; see also Messick, 1993, who talked about the attractiveness of the equal division rule). In situations of asymmetry, however, there may be more (normative) ambiguity on how to distribute outcomes. For example, in Experiments 1 and 2, one could argue that the chips should be distributed equally (which would Emotions in Bargaining 37 (i.e., a situation like the one we now studied in the case of delta = 0), an equal split is generally a focal settlement for bargainers. In more ambiguous situations, they argued, it would be less likely to find such a strong focal point. In this respect, Loewenstein and Moore explicitly referred to asymmetry between parties, and noted that “if there is ambiguity in the situation that allows for alternative interpretations, motivations and expectations will have an effect.” (p. 41). The fact that we did observe an effect of communicated emotions in Experiments 1 and 2 in the symmetric information condition accords with this view. 3 General Discussion In agreement with the social functional account of emotions (see e.g., Keltner & Haidt, 1999), the current findings show that emotions strongly shape the bargaining process. Previous research on the interpersonal effects of emotions basically suggested that it pays to be angry in bargaining (Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006; Van Kleef et al., 2004a, b). The current findings paint a more complex and differentiated picture of the emotion-behavior link in bargaining. The results underscore the importance of distinguishing between the informational effects and the behavioral effects of communicated emotions. The three studies show uniform effects when it comes to the informational consequences of communicating anger, but they differ with regard to the behavioral consequences. Whereas all three experiments suggested that people infer that angry bargainers have higher limits, the findings Emotions in Bargaining 38 (e.g., Sinaceur & Tiedens, 2006; Van Kleef et al., 2004a, b). In agreement with these previous studies, we too assign a central role to perceived limits in bargaining and the negative consequences that bargainers may ascribe to making low offers to angry opponents. Moreover, the results of Experiment 1 corroborate the findings and reasoning of such prior research. We obtained these findings by manipulating emotion independently from the offer. In this sense, our manipulation was different from the manipulations used in previous research where manipulated emotions were closely connected to the offers (e.g., Van Kleef et al., 2004a, b). In these studies, participants made an offer and then, for example, learned that their opponent reacted with anger to their offer (e.g., by communicating ‘this offer makes me really angry’). We decided to disentangle the offer from the communicated emotions by having the recipients (supposedly) respond to the general information participants typed about how they viewed bargaining in general. The advantage of this procedure is that it precludes the possibility that communicated anger is primarily an evaluation of the offer. As a consequence, it excludes the possibility that people decide to give in to an angry opponent because they conclude that apparently their opponent did not like the offer. With the alternative procedure we were able to show identical effects as Van Kleef et al. in our Experiment 1, thereby lending more credence to their basic reasoning. We extend and qualify previous findings, however, by explicitly distinguishing  Emotions in Bargaining 39 bargaining literature, we suggest that people may actively try to lower the angry opponent’s limits by using deception as a strategic tool. In this respect, the current findings also add to the literature on deception in bargaining. It has been noted that the bargaining process is ripe with opportunities for deception (e.g., Bok, 1978; Boles, Croson, & Murnighan, 2000; O’Connor & Carnevale, 1997; Steinel & De Dreu, 2004). Research on deception in bargaining is still in its embryonic phase, however, especially with regard to the antecedents of deception. Prior research on the use of deception in bargaining has predominantly taken an individual and instrumental perspective in the sense that people are assumed to be more likely to resort to deception the more likely it is that deception will bring them higher personal outcomes (e.g., Boles et al., 2000; Lewicki, 1983; Lewicki & Litterer, 1985; O’Connor & Carnevale, 1997; Tenbrunsel, 1998; see also Trevino & Youngblood, 1990). On the one hand, the findings of Experiment 2 align with this framework because they suggest that people strategically use deception to lower the other’s limits. On the other hand, they illustrate that people do not indiscriminately turn to defection in the sense that they are more likely to refrain from deceiving the happy recipient, to the point where they even offered more chips to the happy recipient than to the angry recipient. This view of ‘tailored deception’ accords with more recent insights by Steinel and De Dreu (2004) who demonstrated that people are more willing to deceive Emotions in Bargaining 40 (symmetric vs. asymmetric). As we noted, this manipulation has been successfully used before, both in the way we used it in Experiment 1 (i.e., in which participants could only make an offer), and in Experiment 2 (i.e., where participants could also send information prior to making their offer). What our findings show is that effects of information advantage may be fundamentally different in situations where people can only make an offer than in situations where people can also send information prior to making their offer. That is, we did observe a significant interaction between emotion and information on the offers in Experiment 2, but not in Experiment 1. As we reasoned, this difference was due to the fact that with a pre-offer sending of information bargainers may actively change the limits of their opponent. It appears that this active process is necessary for the emotion × information interaction to emerge. Prior research has never acknowledged this difference. Of course this has much to do with the reason why these situations were studied in the first place. As we reasoned in our general introduction the main purpose of introducing asymmetry of information in research on ultimatum bargaining research has been to demonstrate that people often make high offers because they fear that low offers will be rejected. In this respect, both possibilities provide the opportunity to make lower offers, and as such both situations have primarily been regarded as evidence for the fear of rejection hypothesis (e.g., Pillutla & Murnighan, 2003). Emotions in Bargaining 41 exchange of information. Indeed, the findings of Experiment 2 show that people are especially likely to deceive an angry opponent. Put differently, it also means that with a happy opponent people do not want to go “all the way” to further their own outcomes. Thus, there are limits to the strategic means that people use to further their own outcomes, and these limits are partly shaped by interpersonal effects of emotions. With our Experiment 3 on delta bargaining we were also able to show that the interpersonal effects of emotions in bargaining may be contingent on the consequences of rejection. With regard to the theoretical analysis regarding emotion effects in bargaining, the findings suggest that when fear for rejection is low, communicating anger may backfire. At this point it seems appropriate to elaborate some more on the difference in processes leading up to the findings we reported in Experiments 2 and 3. Whereas both studies suggest that communicating anger may backfire, and both studies assign a crucial role to fear of rejection, it should be noted that the underlying process is fundamentally different for Experiments 2 and 3. Note that in Experiment 2, our deception study, the process is essentially based on the notion that in all conditions, participants fear the consequences of having their offers rejected, and that deception offers bargainers the possibility to reach acceptance of low offers. Thus, deception did not alter the of rejection, but merely functioned as a strategic tool to In contrast, in Experiment 3, the manipulation of relative Emotions in Bargaining 42 manipulations, suggesting that in all conditions participants were equally focused on getting their offer accepted. In Experiment 3, the likelihood ratings were especially low when consequences of rejection were low and the recipient was angry. Another way of putting it is that in Experiment 3, the participants’ anger could find its way to the person responsible for their anger, the angry recipient. As we demonstrated, communicated anger also backfired in Experiment 2, when the participants had an information advantage and could deceive the recipient. Our mediation analysis indicated that in that experiment, the offers were mediated by the perceived limits, which fits with the notion that if the consequences of rejection are high, people primarily let their decisions be influenced by the limits they assign to their opponent. One might wonder, however, whether the process might also run via the participants’ emotions, as it did in Experiment 3. We did check for this possibility by testing for moderated mediation along the lines of Experiment 3. This analysis indicated that the offers in Experiment 2 were not mediated by the participants’ emotion (neither anger, nor happiness). It thus seems that, if the consequences of rejection are high, the bargainers’ first interest is to deal with their opponent’s limits, and not to act on their own emotions. If, however, the consequences of rejection are low, the own emotions come into play. As such, our findings also constitute first evidence for the possibility that the reciprocity of emotions (Hatfield et al., 1994; Van Kleef et al., 2004a) in bargaining contexts  Emotions in Bargaining 43 context, expressions of anger appear to be a powerful strategy for claiming value.” The current findings argue against such a general advice, as it is hard to imagine a negotiation setting that would be even shorter than the ultimatum bargaining settings we used. The advantage of concentrating on ultimatum bargaining was that it constitutes a clear bargaining setting with a clear outcome structure, in which many dynamics due to making offers and counteroffers are kept out of the picture. Thanks to this inherent simplicity, we were able to provide clear findings and conclusions regarding interpersonal effects of emotions. In future research, it may also be interesting to broaden the scope by also including other determinants of the power/dependency relation between bargainers, such as the number and attractiveness of the alternatives that allocators and recipients have at their disposal. Bargainers are less dependent on their opponent the more and the higher their alternatives are (e.g., Fisher & Ury, 1981, Pinkley, 1995). If we would include this in our current ultimatum paradigms, it seems likely that communicating anger is especially detrimental when one’s opponent has a high alternative and/or many alternatives. An alternative course would be to see how our findings generalize to other types of bargaining. For example, it may be especially worthwhile to expand the view by also addressing integrative bargaining. In integrative bargaining, bargainers may generate integrative potential (i.e., realize a win-win situation; Fisher & Ury, 1981) if they disclose Emotions in Bargaining 44 do more than ‘just’ backfire to the person communicating the anger. It might prove to be detrimental for all people involved if it keeps the bargainers from realizing the integrative potential (see also Allred, Mallozzi, Matsui, & Raia, 1997; Barry, Fulmer, & Van Kleef, 2004; Forgas, 1998), and communicating happiness may be more beneficial for all parties involved (Carnevale & Isen, 1986; Moore, Kurtzberg, Thompson, & Morris, 1999). To conclude, the current studies underscore the importance of the interpersonal effects of communicated emotions. In contrast to previous research, this does not result in a simple “what-to-do-in-bargaining” advice that can be applied no matter what. What it does show, is that one should think well before following up on the advice that communicating anger pays. Before doing so, be sure to assess the structural characteristics of the bargaining situation in terms of the consequences of rejecting offers, and the possibilities for deception. Emotions in Bargaining 45 Footnotes 1. In terms of the formal description of the delta game (Suleiman, 1996; Van Dijk et al., 2004), this means that in the high consequences conditions, delta was set at 0, and that in the low consequences conditions, delta was set at 0.9. 2. We also considered the participants’ happiness ratings as a potential mediator, but the analyses indicated that after inclusion of the Consequences of Rejection × Participants’ Happiness interaction, the Consequences of Rejection x Recipient’s Emotion interaction on the offers, although considerably reduced, remained significant (p = .04). Apparently, and in agreement with the ascribed importance to anger in bargaining, anger played a more crucial role in explaining offers than happiness. 3. We did not check for this possibility, but some indirect support for the post hoc explanation comes from inspection of the standard deviations in the symmetric information conditions of Experiments 1 and 2, and the high consequences condition of Experiment 3. As this comparison shows, standard deviations were smaller in Experiment 3, which would fit with the notion that leeway was more restricted there. We are of course aware that this is a post hoc explanation with indirect empirical support, but it may be interesting to note that previous studies that allow for a similar comparison reveal a similar pattern. In their studies on the effects of social value orientations on the strategic use of fairness in ultimatum bargaining, Van Emotions in Bargaining 195-204. Allred, K. G., Mallozzi, J. S., Matsui, F., & Raia, C. P. (1997). The influence of anger and compassion on negotiation performance. 175-187. Baron, R. A. (1990). Environmentally induced positive affect: Its impact on self-efficacy, task performance, negotiation, and conflict. 368-384. Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. 1173-1182. Barry, B., Fulmer, I. S., & Van Kleef, G. A. (2004). I laughed, I cried, I settled: The role of emotion in negotiation. In M. J. Gelfand & J. M. Brett (Eds.), (pp. 71-94). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Bok, S. (1978). New York: Pantheon Books. Boles, T. L., Croson, R. T. A., & Murnighan, J. K. (2000). Deception and retribution in repeated ultimatum bargaining. Emotions in Bargaining 47 Clark, M. S., Pataki, S. P., & Carver, V. H. (1996). Some thoughts and findings on self- presentation of emotions in relationships. In G. J. O. Fletcher, & J. Fitness (Eds.), (pp. 247- 274). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Emerson, R. M. (1972a). Exchange theory, Part I: A psychological basis for exchange. In J. Berger, N. Zelditch, Jr., & B. Anderson (Eds.), (Vol. 2, pp. 33-57). Boston: Houghton-Mifflin. Emerson, R. M. (1972b). Exchange theory, Part II: Exchange relations and networks. In J. Berger, N. Zelditch, Jr., & B. Anderson (Eds.), (Vol. 2, pp. 58-87). Boston: Houghton-Mifflin. Fisher, R., & Ury, W. (1981). Boston: Houghton-Mifflin. Forgas, J. P. (1998). On feeling good and getting your way: Mood effects on negotiator cognition and behavior. 565-577. Frank, R. H. (1988). New York: W. W. Norton. Friedman, H. S., & Riggio, R. E. (1981). Effect of individual differences in nonverbal expressiveness on transmission of emotion. 96-104. Emotions in Bargaining Davidson (Eds.), (pp. 112-122). New York: Oxford University Press. Güth, W., Schmittberger, R., & Schwarze, B. (1982). An experimental analysis of ultimum games. 367-388. Güth, W., & Tietz, R. (1990). Ultimatum bargaining behavior: A survey and comparison of experimental results. 417-449. Handgraaf, M. J. J., Van Dijk, E., & De Cremer, D. (2003). Social utility in ultimatum bargaining. 263-283. Hatfield, E., Cacioppo, J., & Rapson, R. L. (1994). New York: Cambridge University Press. Hess, U., & Blairy, S. (2001). Facial mimicry and emotional contagion to dynamic emotional facial expressions and their influence on decoding accuracy. 129-141. Kagel, J. H., Kim, C., & Moser, D. (1996). Fairness in ultimatum games with asymmetric information and asymmetric payoffs. 100-111. Karasawa, K. (2001). Anger vs guilt inference of responsibility and interpersonal reactions. 731-739. Keltner, D., & Haidt, J. (1999). Social functions of emotions at four levels of analysis. Emotions in Bargaining Lewicki, R. J., & Litterer, J. (1985). Homewood, IL: Irwin. Lewicki, R. J., & Stark, N. (1996). What is ethically appropriate in negotiations: An empirical examination of bargaining tactics. 69-95. Loewenstein, G., & Moore, D. A. (2003). When ignorance is bliss: Information exchange and inefficiency in bargaining. 37-58. Messick, D. M. (1993). Equality as a decision heuristic. In B. A. Mellers & J. Baron (Eds.) (pp. 11-31). New York: Cambridge University Press. Moore, D. A., Kurtzberg, T. R., & Thompson, L. L. (1999). Long and short routes to success in electronically mediated negotiations: Group affiliations and good vibrations. 22-43. Muller, D., Judd, C. M., & Yzerbyt, V. Y. (2005). When moderation is mediated and mediation is moderated. 852-863- O’Connor, K. M., & Carnevale, P. J. (1997). A nasty but effective negotiation strategy: Misrepresentation of a common-value issue. 504-515. Paese, P. W., & Gilin, D. A. (2000). When an adversary is caught telling the truth: Reciprocal cooperation versus self-interest in distributive bargaining. Emotions in Bargaining 50 Pillutla, M. M., & Murnighan, J. K. (1996). Unfairness, anger, and spite: Emotional rejections and ultimatum offers. 208-224. Pillutla, M. M., & Murnighan, J. K. (2003). Fairness in bargaining. 16, 241-262. Pinkley, R. L. (1995). Impact of knowledge regarding alternatives to settlement in dyadic negotiations: Whose knowledge counts? 403-417. Pruitt, D. G., & Carnevale, P. J. (1993). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Pruitt, D. G., & Kimmel, M. J. (1977). Twenty years of experimental gaming: Critique, synthesis, and suggestions for the future. 363-392. Roth, A. E., & Malouf, M. W. K. (1979). Game-theoretic models and the role of information in bargaining. 574-594. Roth, A. E., & Murnighan, J. K. (1982). The role of information in bargaining: An experimental study. 1123-1142. Rubin, J. Z., & Brown, B. (1975). New York: Academic Press. Rubin, J. Z., Pruitt, D. G., & Kim, S. H. (1994). Emotions in Bargaining 51 Steinel, W., & De Dreu, C. K. W. (2004). Social motives and strategic misrepresentation in  social decision making. 419-434. Straub, P. G., & Murnighan, J. K. (1995). An experimental investigation of ultimatum games: Information, fairness, expectations, and lowest acceptable offers. 345-364. Suleiman, R. (1996). Expectations and fairness in a modified ultimatum game. 531-554. Tenbrunsel, A. E. (1998). Misrepresentation and expectations of misrepresentation in an ethical dilemma: The role of incentives and temptation. 330-339. Thaler, R. H. (1988). Anomalies: The ultimatum game. 195-206. Trevino, L. K., & Youngblood, S. A. (1990). Bad apples in bad barrels: A causal analysis of ethical decision making behavior. 378-385. Van Dijk, E., De Cremer, D., & Handgraaf, M. J. J. (2004). Social value orientations and the strategic use of fairness in ultimatum bargaining. 697-707. Van Dijk, E., & Tenbrunsel, A. (2005). The battle between self-interest and fairness in Emotions in Bargaining 52 Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2004a). The interpersonal effects of anger and happiness in negotiations. 57- 76. Van Kleef, G. A., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2004b). The interpersonal effects of emotions in negotiations: A motivated information processing approach. 510-528. Wade-Benzoni, Tenbrunsel, A. E., & Bazerman, M. H. (1996). Egocentric interpretations of fairness in asymmetric environmental social dilemmas: explaining harvesting behavior and the role of communication. 67, 111-126. Weg, E., & Zwick, R. (1994). Toward the settlement of the fairness issues in ultimatum games: A bargaining approach. 19-34. Angry M SD Symmetric information 62.04 8.95 Asymmetric information 49.96 9.61 Emotions in Bargaining Happy M SD 56.50 6.27 57.58 12.56 Emotions in Bargaining Angry Happy M SD M SD Symmetric information 63.71 8.94 53.96 8.09 Asymmetric information 49.73 12.21 53.08 16.27 Symmetric information Angry Happy Sending information M 4.93 5.12 SD 2.00 2.01 Making offer M 5.36 4.58 SD 1.55 2.08 Emotions in Bargaining  Asymmetric information Angry Happy 5.77 4.77 1.11 1.48 4.42 5.08 1.90 1.44 Emotions in Bargaining Angry Happy M SD M SD High consequences 47.52 7.11 47.67 4.89 Low consequences 32.56 16.31 45.21 9.03 Emotions in Bargaining Angry Happy M SD M SD ___________________________________________________________________________ High consequences 5.26 1.16 5.81 0.96 Low consequences 3.48 1.66 5.38 1.35 ___________________________________________________________________________
