Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 2, 307–319

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.2.307

Unraveling the Role of Forgiveness in Family Relationships
Gregory R. Maio and Geoff Thomas

Frank D. Fincham

Cardiff University

Florida State University

Katherine B. Carnelley
University of Southampton
Testing the idea that the process of forgiveness is intrinsically different across diverse relationships, this
study examined the role of forgiveness in different family relationships. In 2 laboratory sessions 1 year
apart, 114 families (each including 2 parents and 1 child) completed a new measure of family forgiveness
and many individual-level, relationship-level, and family-level variables that have been previously linked
with forgiveness. After validating the measure of family forgiveness in cross-sectional analyses, investigators performed longitudinal analyses to examine the role of forgiveness in each family relationship
over the 1-year interval. Results indicated many important positive consequences of forgiveness on
individual traits, aspects of each family relationship, and general family environment. However, there
were also important asymmetries in associates of forgiveness across parent– child and parent–parent
relationships, demonstrating the relationship-bound nature of forgiveness.
Keywords: forgiveness, family, self-persuasion, relationships

because these relationships subsume different roles and serve
different psychological needs. Even studies of forgiveness in nonhumans (primates in particular) have increasingly made familial
relationships, rather than individuals, the unit of analysis (de Waal,
2000). In the present research, we examined the pivotal role of this
broader social context in humans by testing whether forgiveness
varies across family relationships.

Most conceptualizations of forgiveness describe it as a deliberative process that transforms a vengeful, negative response into a
positive one (Baumeister, Stillwell, & Wotman, 1990; de Waal,
2000; Fincham, 2000; McCullough et al., 1998). That is, the
forgiver actively attempts to move from negative thoughts, feelings, and behaviors toward the transgressor to more positive
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Consequently, prior models of
forgiveness have focused on individual social– cognitive processes, paying comparatively limited attention to the broader social
context of forgiveness (McCullough, Worthington, & Rachal,
1997; Mikulincer, Shaver, & Slav, 2006; Paleari, Regalia, &
Fincham, 2005).
Although this work has made great strides, any complete understanding will also have to include the type of relationship
between transgressor and victim and the broader context in which
that relationship is embedded (Fincham, 2000; McCullough &
Hoyt, 2002). When forgiveness occurs in relationships, it most
likely serves a purpose that is linked to the nature and functioning
of the relationship itself. For example, the operation of forgiveness
should depend greatly on whether it occurs between two friends,
between two married adults, or between a parent and a child,

The General Process of Forgiveness
The effort that people put into forgiveness raises an important
question about what forgiveness accomplishes. We believe that the
answer to this question is inextricably linked to the relationship
context in which forgiveness occurs. We should find, for example,
that the process of forgiveness is different in relationships between
parents than in relationships between parents and children. This
difference may occur because unforgiveness is related to avoidance behavior (Fincham, Beach, & Davila, 2004; McCullough et
al., 1998). From an evolutionary perspective (see, e.g., D. M. Buss,
1996; Kenrick & Trost, 1997), avoidance should lead to lower
parental care in the parent– child relationship, causing unforgiving
parents to have a decreased chance of gene replication (Trivers,
1985). In other words, evolution may have determined that humans
are inclined to forgive their children (and genetic kin more generally) because of the reproductive advantage that this provides
(Luebbert, 1999). Indeed, in nonhuman primates, such as bonobos,
mothers exhibit high rates of forgiveness of their offspring (as
measured by behavioral reconciliation; de Waal, 1997). Primate
reconciliation may be biased toward kin even after frequency of
interaction is controlled for (de Waal, 2000), at least when population density is low. This finding and other evidence have been
used to support the broader argument that forgiveness is an evolutionary adaptation that protects relationships (Cords & Aureli,
2000; de Waal, 2000).

Gregory R. Maio and Geoff Thomas, School of Psychology, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom; Frank D. Fincham, Department of Family and Child Sciences, Florida State University; Katherine B.
Carnelley, Department of Social and Personality Psychology, School of
Psychology, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
We thank Shamira Fernando, Nick Row, Rachel Dowling, and Jennifer
Brown for their assistance with data collection. We also thank Gordon
Harold for his advice on specific scales and the longitudinal analyses.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Gregory
R. Maio, School of Psychology, Cardiff University, 70 Park Place, Cardiff,
Wales CF10 3AT, United Kingdom. E-mail: maio@cardiff.ac.uk.
307

308

MAIO, THOMAS, FINCHAM, AND CARNELLEY

Among humans, forgiveness may also be influenced by socially
shared knowledge about children’s cognitive capacities and abilities (Kenrick, Li, & Butner, 2003). As a result, societal norms
often encourage greater tolerance of child transgressions, as reflected by more lenient laws regarding punishment of child offenders. Moreover, transgressions are part of normal childhood
development, and parents’ knowledge of this fact can further cause
forgiveness of children to be viewed as a necessary, moral requirement of the parental role. Forgiveness of children by parents does
not possess the supererogatory element of forgiveness in other
relationships (Fincham, 2000; Fincham et al., 2004). Consequently, forgiveness of children may have a less complex set of
antecedents and consequences than forgiveness of parents or between parents.
The avoidance engendered by unforgiveness also has interesting
implications for potential differences in forgiveness between the
father– child relationship and the mother– child relationship.
Avoidance of and detachment from children is often a more
prominent option for fathers than for mothers, consistent with
evolutionary theories about sex differences in requirements for
gene propagation (Kenrick, Trost, & Sundie, 2004). As a result, it
may become comparatively easy for fathers to become less involved in their relationships with children and, consequently, to be
less effective at detecting and conveying forgiveness in their
relationships with children. This view fits evidence of unique
attitudinal and attachment processes in father– child relationships
(Maio, Fincham, & Lycett, 2000) and of more problems in father–
child communication than in mother– child communication (see
Botta & Dumlao, 2002; Kornhaber & Marcos, 2000; SeiffgeKrenke, 2002). In addition, Hoyt, Fincham, McCullough, Maio,
and Davila (2005) found significantly less relationship-specific
variance in forgivingness in the father– child relationship than in
other family relationships.
These parent– child and father–mother differences provide an
important context for interpreting the wealth of information about
forgiveness. Several relationship-level and individual-level variables have been linked to forgiveness. These variables include
empathy with a transgressor (Paleari et al., 2005), conflict resolution (Fincham et al., 2004), relationship satisfaction (Kachadourian, Fincham, & Davila, 2004), ambivalence toward married
partners (Kachadourian, Fincham, & Davila, 2005), low levels of
depression (Hayley & Strickland, 1986), cooperation (Karremans,
Van Lange, & Holland, 2005), psychological well-being (Karremans, Van Lange, Ouwerkerk, & Kluwer, 2003), and high conscientiousness, emotional stability, and agreeableness (Hoyt et al.,
2005). The role of these variables as antecedents or consequences
of forgiveness is somewhat unclear. The personality traits in particular are usually regarded as stable, causal factors in analyses of
social behavior; yet there is important evidence that these traits
change across the life span and through late adulthood, perhaps
changing less after age 50 (Caspi, Roberts, & Shiner, 2005).
Family dynamics are a potentially important antecedent of these
personality changes during childhood and middle adulthood (Robins, Caspi, & Moffit, 2002), and tendencies to forgive other family
members may be one important facet of family dynamics.
The extant evidence has also focused on transgressions involving adults who may or may not have been in close relationships. To
the extent that we are correct in asserting the importance of
relationship-specific dynamics in forgiveness, these effects should

vary across family relationships. Past studies have not examined
the roles of these diverse individual-level, relationship-level, and
family-level variables across different types of relationships or the
direction of effects over time. Doing so would provide evidence
documenting the relationship-specific nature of the forgiveness
construct. For instance, if there is an evolutionary pressure to
forgive one’s children, forgiveness should relate to relationship
outcomes more strongly in the parent–parent relationship than in
the parent– child relationship, in which forgiveness is practically
inevitable and unlikely to vary in a meaningful way. In addition,
there should be less accurate detection of apologies and of forgiveness within the father– child relationship than in the mother–
child relationship because of higher detachment in the father– child
relationships. It is also conceivable that this detachment attenuates
the relations between forgiveness from fathers and the family
environment.

The Present Research
To demonstrate the role of relationship context in forgiveness,
we designed our longitudinal research program with several steps.
First, we sought to develop a valid and easy-to-use measure of
forgiveness across family dyads. We then tested the construct
validity of this measure by including measures of the general
disposition to forgive, other family members’ perceptions of forgiveness, and a variety of individual-level, dyad-level, and familylevel variables that have been linked with forgiveness (described
earlier). In addition, we used a new measure of perceptions of
forgiveness from other family members to verify that our new
measure of family forgiveness yields significant evidence of agreement and perceived reciprocity in forgiveness across relationships,
consistent with past evidence (Hoyt et al., 2005). Finally, after
these within-wave analyses, we performed longitudinal analyses to
examine whether the aforementioned variables can be plausibly
modeled as antecedents of forgiveness, consequences of forgiveness, or both, over an extended time (1 year).
Most important, all of these aims were pursued across different
types of relationships. There were six potential dyads within the
family units: child forgives father, child forgives mother, father
forgives child, father forgives mother, mother forgives child, and
mother forgives father. Our analyses tested whether, consistent
with the notion of an evolutionary pressure to forgive children, the
effects of forgiveness on the individual-level, relationship-level,
and family-level variables were more likely in the parent–parent
relationship than in the parent– child relationship. In addition, we
tested whether the agreement about forgiveness was more likely in
the mother– child relationship than in the father– child relationship,
consistent with prior evidence for increased relationship detachment in the latter relationship. Such evidence would demonstrate
the relationship-specific nature of forgiveness.

Method
Participants
Participants were 342 individuals from 114 families who were
recruited through letters from the children’s schools, flyers, and
articles in a local newspaper. Ninety-five (83.3%) of the families
participated in a follow-up data collection approximately 12

FORGIVENESS IN FAMILIES

months later. For each family, we recruited two opposite-sex
parents living at home and one of their children between 12 and 16
years of age (50 boys, 66 girls, and 1 not identified). Both parents
had been living together for at least 4 years (M ⫽ 17 years and 5
months, SD ⫽ 5 years) and were, on average, in their early forties
(42 years for mothers, 44 years for fathers). The families’ ethnicity
was primarily British/White, with only one Asian, one AfroCaribbean, and three mixed families in the sample. Twenty-five of
the parents left secondary schooling without a degree, 75 obtained
a General Certificate of Secondary Education or A-levels as their
highest formal education (i.e., secondary schooling), 120 obtained
higher education of some type (e.g., university degree, trade examinations), and 8 did not indicate their educational level. Parents’
average joint annual income was £36,970 (⬇U.S. $73,936; SD ⫽
£17,511, ⬇U.S. $35,018), which was neither wealthy nor disadvantaged in Britain at the time of the research. Families were paid £70
(⬇U.S. $140) for participation in both waves of data collection.1

Procedure
Each family took part in two 2-hr lab sessions, which were
between 12 and 14 months apart. Several families who could not
come to the lab for the second session (e.g., because they moved
out of the area) were sent the second set of measures through the
mail.
Participants were told that they would take part in a study on
different topics related to family communication. In each wave of
data collection, participants completed our new measure of the
tendency to forgive the other family members who attended the lab
sessions and our new measure of perceptions of the other family
members’ tendencies to forgive participants. In addition, the family members completed measures of many other criterion variables, which were assessed at the level of the individual, relationship, and family. The individual-level and family-level variables
were presented in one booklet that was titled Myself. The
relationship-level measures were presented in two booklets that
identified each of the two family relationships relevant to the
participant. For example, the father received a booklet titled My
Daughter or My Son and a booklet titled My Partner. Before the
first session, we mailed out a booklet that assessed demographics.
In each session, the order of booklet completion and of the measures within booklets was randomly determined for each individual. Participants were debriefed after the second wave of data
collection.

Family Forgiveness Questionnaire
Our Family Forgiveness Questionnaire (FFQ) included a component to measure tendencies to forgive others, followed by a
component to measure perceptions of forgiveness from others. The
construction, reliability, and validity of the scale are described in
the Results.
Tendency to forgive other family members. The measure of
family forgiveness attempted to ensure that the offenses were
perceived as being at least somewhat serious by asking each
participant to first remember times that the target family member
offended the participant by doing things that could not be easily
understood or excused. The participant then rated his or her agreement with eight items relating to forgiveness (see Table 1) on a

309

Table 1
Family Forgiveness Questionnaire: Child Forgives Father
Version
Item

Factor loading

easily forgive him
see him as positively as I did before
hold a grudge against hima
see him more negatively than I did beforea
have difficulty forgiving hima
never really see him as positively as before he
wronged mea
I do not hold a grudge against him
I do not see him more negatively than I did before

.59
.68
⫺.77
⫺.79
⫺.81

I
I
I
I
I
I

⫺.79
.65
.74

Note. Loadings are for Wave I data. The initial stem for each item was
“When my father annoys, hurts, or offends me . . . .”
a
items are reverse scored in the final scale.

7-point scale ranging from –3, strongly disagree, to ⫹ 3, strongly
agree.
Perceptions of forgiveness. The measure of perceptions of
forgiveness was similar to our measure of the tendency to forgive
other family members, except that only four items were used, and
we reversed the grammatical subject and object in the items. For
example, using a 7-point scale ranging from –3, strongly disagree,
to ⫹ 3, strongly agree, mothers responded to the following items
in the version that assessed her perception of forgiveness from her
child (a daughter): “She easily forgives me,” “She holds a grudge
against me,” “She sees me as positively as she did before,” and
“She sees me more negatively than she did before”.

Individual-Level Validity Variables
Anxiety. Parents completed 20 items assessing trait anxiety
within the State–Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI; Spielberger, Gorsuch, & Lushene, 1970). This measure exhibited good reliability
across time (rs ⬎ .74, ps ⬍ .001) and good internal consistency
(␣s ⬎ .89).
Children completed the Child Manifest Anxiety Scale (C. R.
Reynolds & Richmond, 1978), which includes 27 items to assess
anxiety. In the present research, stability across time (r ⫽ .66, p ⬍
.001) and internal consistency were good (␣ ⫽ .85).
Depression. Depression in parents was assessed using the
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)—Short Form (Beck & Beck,
1972), which measures 13 symptoms (e.g., sadness). The BDI
short form correlates highly with the full 21-item BDI and with
clinicians’ ratings, and there is good concurrent validity with other
measures of depression (Beck & Beck, 1972). In our research, the
BDI exhibited good reliability across time (rs ⬎ .63, ps ⬍ .001)
and adequate internal consistency for both parents (␣s ⱖ .70).
Depression in children was assessed using the Child Depression
Inventory (CDI; Kovacs, 1981), which is a self-report inventory
measuring 27 symptoms of depressed mood. In our research, the
CDI exhibited good reliability across the year-long interval (r ⫽
.62, p ⬍ .001) and good internal consistency (␣ ⫽ .88).
1
Because this dataset is very large, we should note for future reviews or
meta-analyses that no other manuscripts have been prepared from the data
examined in this article.

310

MAIO, THOMAS, FINCHAM, AND CARNELLEY

Forgiveness as a trait. We assessed forgiveness as an individual difference variable in the parents using eight items of the
Propensity to Forgive Others (FO) subscale from the Multidimensional Forgiveness Inventory (MFI; Tangney, Fee, Reinsmith,
Boone, & Lee, 1999). Each item presents a hypothetical offense
(e.g., a cousin borrows money under false pretense), and respondents are asked to indicate how likely they would be to forgive the
offender under those circumstances. For the children, we used
three of the eight items of the FO subscale of the MFI and adapted
five of the remaining items to be more specific to situations that
are relevant for children. All participants responded to each item
using a 5-point scale ranging from 1, not at all likely, to 5, very
likely; high scores indicated high tendencies to forgive. Internal
consistency for this subscale was high in Tangney et al.’s (1999)
research (␣ ⫽ .76). In our research, good stability across the year
(rs ⬎ .59, ps ⬍ .001) and good internal consistency (␣s ⬎ .73)
were obtained for both parents and the children.
Need for approval. The 13-item short form Social Desirability
Scale (W. M. Reynolds, 1982) measured need for approval in
parents. The short form demonstrates comparable reliability to the
standard form (W. M. Reynolds, 1982) and is a good measure of
situational demand (Paulhus, 1991). The stability across the year
was adequate (rs ⬎ .51, ps ⬍ .001), but the internal consistency of
this scale was low (.54 ⬍ ␣s ⬍ .65).
A slightly altered version of the 13-item short form assessed
need for approval in children, but this scale also exhibited low
internal consistency (␣ ⫽ .58). Thus, we instead used the Child
Manifest Anxiety Scale (C. R. Reynolds & Richmond, 1978),
which includes a 9-item measure of tendencies to respond in a
socially desirable manner. The measure’s stability across time (r ⫽
.55, p ⬍ .001) and internal consistency were adequate (␣ ⫽ .70).
Personality. Both parents and children completed Goldberg’s
(1992) 50-item bipolar scale to measure their extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, emotional stability, and intellect orientation (i.e., openness). (A research assistant was on hand to
explain items to the children while they completed this questionnaire.) Responses to the five personality scales exhibited adequate
stability across the year for most of the scales for all participants
(rs ⬎ .50, ps ⬍ .001), with just one exception: fathers’ emotional
stability (r ⫽ .43, p ⬍ .001). The internal consistency of the scales
for all family members was good (␣s ⬎ .70).
Self-esteem. The 10-item Rosenberg (1979) Self–Esteem
Scale was used to measure parents’ global personal evaluations of
the self. Responses to this measure exhibited good stability across
the year (rs ⬎ .68, ps ⬍ .001) and good internal consistency (␣s ⬎
.84). In children, self-esteem was assessed using the Global SelfWorth Scale from the Self-Perception Profile for Children (Harter,
1985). The reliability across time for this scale was low (r ⫽ .34,
p ⬍ .001), but the internal consistency was good (␣ ⫽ .74).
Child aggression. We used the 20-item Aggressive Behavior
subscale of the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach, 1991)
to obtain descriptions of the competencies and behavioral-emotional
problems of the children as seen by their parents. Both parents’
responses to the scale revealed good stability across the year (rs ⬎
.72, ps ⬍ .001) and high internal consistency (␣s ⬎ .84).
Child hostility. Children’s hostility was assessed using the
Buss–Durkee Hostility Inventory (A. H. Buss & Durkee, 1957).
The measure’s stability across time (r ⫽ .56, p ⬍ .001) and
internal consistency (␣ ⫽ .73) were good.

Relationship-Level Validity Variables
Relationship quality. Five components of relationship quality
were assessed using the Perceived Relationship Quality Component Inventory (Fletcher, Simpson, & Thomas, 2000): satisfaction,
commitment, intimacy, trust, and love. (A three-item Passion
Component was omitted because of its irrelevance to relationships
with children.) Fletcher et al. (2000) recommended using only the
best exemplars of the five relationship quality components as
measures of global perceived relationship quality. In our research,
this five-item scale exhibited high stability across the year for
parents’ evaluations of both of their family relationships (rs ⬎ .73,
ps ⬍ .001) and lower (though moderate) stability for children’s
evaluations of their relationships with both parents (rs ⫽ .48
[fathers] and .50 [mothers], ps ⬍ .001). The scale exhibited good
internal consistency among parents and their children (␣s ⱖ .70).
Relationship closeness. Participants completed the Inclusion
of Other in Self Scale (IOS; Aron, Aron, & Smollen, 1992) as a
measure of subjective closeness in each relationship. Aron et al.
(1992) reported high test–retest reliability for the IOS. Over our
1-year interval, this measure exhibited good stability for parents’
reports of closeness to each other and their child (rs ⬎ .56, ps ⬍ .001)
and somewhat lower stability for children’s reports of closeness to
their parents (rs ⫽ .36 [fathers] and .34 [mothers], ps ⬍ .001).
Tendency to apologize. Three items measured family members’
tendencies to apologize for offenses. For example, when describing
their relationship with their daughters, mothers were asked, “How
often does she apologize for offenses against you?” and “In general,
to what extent does she apologize for her offenses against you?”
Participants rated items on scales ranging from 0, never or not at all,
to 4, very often or extremely. This scale exhibited good stability across
the year for parents’ reports of other family members’ tendencies to
apologize (rs ⬎ .60, ps ⬍ .001) and lower (though moderate) stability
for children’s reports of their parents’ tendencies to apologize (rs ⫽
.48 [fathers] and .49 [mothers], ps ⬍ .001). There was good internal
consistency among parents and children (␣s ⬎ .76).
Offense repetition. Three items assessed family members’ tendencies to repeat offenses. For example, when describing their
relationship with their sons, fathers were asked, “How often does
he repeat the same offense against you?” and “How often does he
repeat the same offense, after he is aware that he has hurt you?”
Participants rated each item on scales ranging from 0, never, to 4, very
often. This scale exhibited good stability across the year for parents’
reports of other family members’ tendencies to repeat offenses (rs ⬎
.54, ps ⬍ .001) and lower (though moderate) stability for children’s
reports of their parents’ tendencies to repeat offenses (rs ⫽ .45
[fathers] and .48 [mothers], ps ⬍ .001). The scale exhibited good
internal consistency among parents and children (␣s ⬎ .81).
Relationship conflict. Family members responded to 18 items
assessing the intensity, frequency, and resolution of conflicts with
the other family members. The items presented to the parents and
children were modified from the Children’s Perception of Interparental Conflict Scale (Grych, Seid, & Fincham, 1992) to assess
the frequency, intensity, and resolution of relationship conflicts.
After appropriate reverse coding, higher scores on these subscales
reflected more conflict frequency, more intensity, and lower resolution. The three subscales and the total scale exhibited good
reliability across the year (rs ⬎ .50, ps ⬍ .001) and good internal
consistency among parents and children (␣s ⬎ .71)

FORGIVENESS IN FAMILIES

311

forgiveness. In each dyad, the first factor accounted for more than
half of the variance and more than three times as much variance as
the next factor. Factor loadings for all of the items always exceeded |.50|, with most exceeding |.70| (see examples in Table 1).
In addition, analyses for each dyadic scale revealed alpha reliability coefficients exceeding .87 and strong test–retest correlations
over the 1-year period (all .53 ⬍ rs ⬍ . 74, ps ⬍ .001).
Mean responses were consistent with our hypothesis that forgiveness from parents is less supererogatory in nature. Fathers’ tendencies
to forgive the child were significantly higher (M ⫽ 2.06; SD ⫽ 0.99)
than their tendencies to forgive the mother (M ⫽ 1.66; SD ⫽ 1.16),
t(113) ⫽ 3.93, p ⬍ .001, and mothers’ tendencies to forgive the child
were significantly higher (M ⫽ 2.22; SD ⫽ 0.87) than their tendencies
to forgive the father (M ⫽ 1.08; SD ⫽ 1.41), t(114) ⫽ 9.38, p ⬍ .001.
As expected, the above differences between parent and child forgiveness were greater among mothers than among fathers, F(1, 111) ⫽
33.00, p ⬍ .001. Also, children forgave their mothers significantly
more (M ⫽ 1.37; SD ⫽ 1.26) than they forgave their fathers (M ⫽
1.10; SD ⫽ 1.44), t(108) ⫽ 2.87, p ⬍ .005.
Perceptions of forgiveness by other family members. We used
the above factor analytic method to evaluate the dimensionality of
family members’ ratings of another family member’s tendency to
forgive (e.g., father perceives forgiveness from daughter). The
results for each and every forgiveness dyad revealed only one
strong latent variable for the measures of perceptions of forgiveness. In each dyad, the first factor accounted for more than
half of the variance and at least three times as much variance as
the next factor. Factor loadings for all of the items exceeded
|.50|, with most exceeding |.60|. Scale reliability was above .73
for all dyads, and there were strong and significant test–retest
correlations over the 1-year period (rs ⬎ .54, ps ⬍ .001),
although the stability of child perceptions of father forgiveness
was somewhat lower than the rest (r ⫽ .39, p ⬍ .001), consistent with other observations below.

Attachment. Parents completed the anxiety, dependence, and
closeness subscales of Collins and Read’s (1990) romantic attachment
measure. Children’s attachment to parents was assessed with a measure created by Cook (2000) to assess two of Collins and Read’s
(1990) attachment dimensions: attachment anxiety and attachment
dependence. The third dimension, closeness, was deleted because it
was deemed inappropriate for parent– child relationships due to the
wording of those items. On balance, the subscales exhibited good
stability among parents and children (.47 ⬍ rs ⬍ .66, ps ⬍ .001). The
subscales demonstrated good internal consistency across parents and
children (␣s ⬎ .70), except in the measurement of the fathers’ dependent attachment (␣ ⫽ .49) and closeness (␣ ⫽ .69) to the mother.

Family-Level Validity Variables: Family Environment
All family members completed the Family Environment Scale
(FES), which assesses 10 dimensions of the social– environmental
characteristics of the home (Moos & Moos, 1981). For the purposes
of our research, we used the three subscales in the relationship domain
of the FES: cohesion (family members’ support for each other),
expressiveness (family members’ expression of feelings), and conflict
(openly expressed conflict). The family relationships dimension,
which collapses across these subscales, has been reported to have high
internal consistency and good construct validity (Holahan & Moos,
1983). In our research, the total dimension and its subscales exhibited
stability across the year-long interval (.45 ⬍ rs ⬍ .82, ps ⬍ .001) and
good internal consistency (␣s ⬎ .76).

Results
Wave 1 Analyses
Scale Construction
Tendencies to forgive family members. We submitted each
family member’s Wave 1 ratings of tendencies to forgive another
family member (e.g., father forgives daughter) to a principal axis
factor analysis, using a scree plot and factor interpretability to
guide factor selection. The results for each and every forgiveness
dyad revealed only one strong latent variable for the measures of

Concurrent Predictive Validity
Individual-level validity. As shown in Table 2, we obtained
significant correlations between responses to Tangney et al.’s (1999)

Table 2
Individual-Level Correlates of Tendencies to Forgive
Child forgives
Father

Father forgives
Mother

Child

Mother forgives

Mother

Child

Father

Variable

Wave 1

Wave 2

Wave 1

Wave 2

Wave 1

Wave 2

Wave 1

Wave 2

Wave 1

Wave 2

Wave 1

Wave 2

Trait forgiveness
Trait anxiety
Depression
Need for approval
Self-esteem
Extraversion
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Emotional stability
Intellect

.19*
⫺.15
⫺.49*
.28*
.39*
.13
.29*
.21*
.44*
.27*

.19
⫺.34*
⫺.42*
.32*
.26*
.06
.14
.06
.24*
.18

.19*
⫺.24*
⫺.48*
.25*
.46*
.27*
.30*
.24*
.48*
.29*

.31*
⫺.32*
⫺.36*
.28*
.35*
.14
.21
.20
.30*
.29*

.24*
⫺.17
⫺.15
.16
.16
.28*
.30*
.20*
.16
.13

.15
⫺.18
⫺.08
.09
.09
.00
.08
.15
.08
.12

.29*
⫺.37*
⫺.40*
.12
.30*
.32*
.22*
.08
.26*
.17

.12
⫺.41*
⫺.24*
.18
.36*
.27*
.21*
.10
.33*
.27*

.30*
⫺.19*
⫺.08
.16
.21*
⫺.04
.11
.10
.21*
.05

.20
⫺.11
.05
.14
⫺.03
.04
.25*
.03
.12
.03

.38*
⫺.42*
⫺.35*
.26*
.23*
.06
.32*
.23*
.48*
.11

.32*
⫺.38*
⫺.27*
.38*
.28*
.15*
.38*
.24*
.30*
.14

Note. The duplication of .16/.09 in “Father forgives, child” column is valid and coincidental.
*
p ⬍ .05.

MAIO, THOMAS, FINCHAM, AND CARNELLEY

312

measure of the disposition to forgive and forgiveness in every dyad.
In addition, consistent with past research, participants who exhibited
higher forgiveness also showed lower anxiety and depression, but
higher need for approval and self-esteem. Similarly, fathers and
mothers who were more likely to forgive each other tended to be
higher in agreeableness and emotional stability and, to a lesser extent,
extraversion and conscientiousness. In contrast, Table 2 shows that
children who were more likely to forgive their parents also possessed
higher levels of extraversion (except when the father was being
forgiven), agreeableness, conscientiousness, emotional stability, and
intellect and lower levels of hostility. (Hostility correlations are not
shown in the table because hostility was measured only for the child:
The correlation with the child’s forgiveness of the father was ⫺.35,
p ⬍ .01, and the correlation with forgiveness of the mother was ⫺.38,
p ⬍ .001). Consistent with our hypothesis about the evolutionary
requirement for parents to forgive their children, Table 2 shows
weaker correlations with individual-level variables for parents’ forgiveness of their children; the magnitude of associations was significantly weaker for parents’ forgiveness of their children than for their
forgiveness of each other, T (Wilcoxon’s matched pairs) ⫽ 3.00, p ⬍
.004.
Dyad-level validity. For the dyad level, we calculated partial
correlations between each family member’s forgiveness of another
family member and each aspect of their relationship (as reported
by the person who rated forgiveness), while controlling for the
same aspect of their relationship with the other family member. As
shown in Table 3, children who were more likely to forgive their
father were more likely to report receiving apologies from him,
independent of the extent to which these children reported receiving apologies from the mother. Children’s forgiveness of their
father was also uniquely associated with the father’s tendency to
repeat offenses, anxious and dependent attachment to the father,
closeness to him, and conflict with him. All of these relations were
also independent of the same aspect of the children’s relationship
with the mother (e.g., tendency to repeatedly offend the mother;
see Table 3). Moreover, the partial correlations between the children’s forgiveness of the father and the aspect of the child’s
relationship with the mother (e.g., tendency to receive apologies
from her) were not significant after we controlled for the aspect of

the children’s relationship with the father (e.g., tendency to receive
apologies from the father; see figures in parentheses in Table 3). A
similar pattern emerged for the other forgiveness dyads (not
shown; tables available upon request). In most cases, forgiveness
of the target correlated significantly with aspects of the relationship with the target and not significantly with aspects of the
relationship with the other target. More important, the direction of
difference between the correlations almost always indicated that
the correlation between forgiveness of the target and aspects of the
relationship with the target was the stronger correlation, resulting
in a highly significant difference across the pairs of correlations, Ts
(Wilcoxon’s matched pairs) ⫽ 3.23 (child forgives), 2.80 (father
forgives), 2.80 (mother forgives), all ps ⬍ .01.
Family-level validity. At the family level, higher forgiveness of
other family members in each of the six dyads was correlated with a
more positive experience of the family environment. The largest
correlations occurred when we examined children’s forgiveness of
their father (r ⫽ .54, p ⬍ .001) and mother (r ⫽ .57, p ⬍ .001) and
when we examined the mother’s forgiveness of the father (r ⫽ .59,
p ⬍ .001). These correlations were significantly higher than the
correlations that occurred when we examined the father’s forgiveness
of the child (r ⫽ .26, p ⬍ .05) and the mother (r ⫽ .32, p ⬍ .01; all
zs ⬎ 1.91, ps ⱕ .05). The correlation between perceived family
environment and the mother’s forgiveness of the child was between
these extremes (r ⫽ .42, p ⬍ .001). Thus, forgiveness in each dyad
may be important for family environment, although forgiveness from
fathers plays a significantly weaker role.

Agreement and Reciprocity in Forgiveness
Consistent with our hypothesis about poorer communication by
fathers with children, fathers were significantly less likely to
perceive forgiveness from children who reported forgiving them
(r ⫽ .11) than to perceive forgiveness from mothers who reported
forgiving them (r ⫽ .45, z ⫽ 2.74, p ⬍ .007), whereas mothers did
not significantly differ in their ability to detect forgiveness from
children (r ⫽ .24) and fathers (r ⫽ .21, z ⫽ 0.24, ns). The children
were more likely to perceive forgiveness from mothers who reported forgiving them (r ⫽ .24, p ⬍ .01), but the children were not

Table 3
Partial Correlations Between Children’s Forgiveness and Aspects of Their Relationships
Child forgives
Father

Mother

Variable

Wave 1

Wave 2

Wave 1

Wave 2

Apology
Repetition of offense
Dependent attachment
Anxious attachment
Quality
Closeness
Conflict

.45* (⫺.02)
⫺.22* (.01)
⫺.50* (⫺.16)
⫺.30* (.00)
.56* (.16)
.43* (⫺.06)
⫺.59* (⫺.23*)

.51* (.10)
⫺.54* (⫺.19)
⫺.55* (⫺.08)
⫺.42* (.13)
.56* (.10)
.47* (.09)
⫺.64* (⫺.29*)

.25* (.27*)
⫺.20* (⫺.10)
⫺.39* (⫺.23*)
⫺.26* (⫺.13)
.49* (.25*)
.26* (.18)
⫺.53* (.20*)

.51* (.08)
⫺.56* (⫺.09)
⫺.46* (⫺.19)
⫺.18 (⫺.14)
.42* (.13)
.49* (⫺.10)
⫺.66* (⫺.16)

Note. Text entries control for aspects of the relationship with the other family member. Entries in parentheses
are partial correlations involving aspects of the relationship with the other family member, while controlling for
the same aspects of the relationship with the target.
*
p ⬍ .05.

FORGIVENESS IN FAMILIES

Time 1

313

Time 2
A

Forgiveness

C

Target
Variable

Forgiveness

d1

D
B

Target
Variable

d2

Figure 1. The cross-lagged correlational stability design. The path labels (A, B, C, and D) are used to describe
results of our path models in Tables 4 – 6. The path from Wave 1 forgiveness to Wave 2 forgiveness (Path A)
represents the reliability of our measure of forgiveness across time; this reliability was high in all analyses. The
path from the target variable at Wave 1 to the target variable at Wave 2 (Path B) represents the reliability of the
target measure across time, which was high in all analyses and is consistent with the high stability correlations
reported earlier in the article. The paths of greater interest represent the effect of the target variable (e.g., anxiety)
at Wave 1 on forgiveness 1 year later (Path C) and the effect of forgiveness at Wave 1 on the target variable 1
year later (Path D). These crossed paths represent the ability of the target variables to predict changes in
forgiveness over the year and the ability of forgiveness to predict changes in the target variables over the year.

significantly more likely to perceive forgiveness from fathers who
reported forgiving them (r ⫽ .08, ns).
There was strong perceived reciprocity in all of the forgiveness
relations. In each dyad, family members reported forgiving family
members whom they perceived as having forgiven them (.44 ⬍
rs ⬍ .65, all ps ⬍ .001). In other words, family members tended
to forgive those who they believed had forgiven them.

Cross-Sectional Consistency Across Waves
The internal consistency of the scales in Wave 2 was highly
similar to their internal consistency in Wave 1. Also, the
individual-level, dyad-level, and family-level relations were very
similar to those obtained in Wave 1, with most of the significant
relations remaining significant across both waves. In addition, the
patterns of agreement and reciprocity observed in Wave 1 were
replicated in Wave 2. The strong convergence of patterns at all
three levels of analyses laid the foundation for the final stage of
our analyses, which used a cross-lagged stability design to examine the roles of each variable over time.

Longitudinal Analyses
Analytic Strategy for the Cross-Lagged Analyses
Figure 1 depicts the basic structure of our cross-lagged analyses,
which enabled us to examine the relations between the variables
across the year-long interval. Although Figure 1 shows the essential
construct-level elements of the cross-lagged model, choices about
how to calculate the variables can add layers of complexity. Researchers must make a choice of analyzing the variables as manifest indicators (i.e., a total scale score), as latent variables that use item parcels
as manifest indicators, or as latent variables with all items as manifest indicators. Although each of these choices remains controversial,

some general principles can be applied (Fincham, Beach, Harold, &
Osborne, 1997; Fincham, Harold, & Gano-Phillips, 2000; Little, Cunningham, Shahar, & Widaman, 2002). Three factors compelled us to
rely principally on analyses that focused on the variables as manifest
indicators (e.g., using total scale scores): Most of the variables that we
examined are well-established constructs with a reliable and unidimensional structure; it was relatively complex and unprofitable to
attempt to identify different or similar measurement models across
dyads and times in our multidyad, longitudinal design; and our focus
was on identifying the causes and effects of forgiveness for each
target variable (rather than on generating a complex causal model
across diverse variables with potential shared variance between items
assessing different constructs). Nonetheless, in a few cases in which
extant evidence indicated that the target variable subsumed a specific
number of theory-relevant subdimensions or poor reliability as a total
scale (e.g., FES and attachment dimensions), we have presented the
results analyzing the subdimensions as separate manifest variables.
For example, our analysis of family environment separates the subscales assessing family conflict, cohesion, and expressiveness. This
approach enabled us to maintain a consistent, parsimonious method of
longitudinal analysis across variables, while respecting the need to not
obscure distinct components of constructs.2
Another consideration was the significant within-wave correlations exhibited for both relationship dyads in which the participant
was a member. For example, fathers’ tendency to forgive the
mother and children’s tendency to forgive her were both correlated
2
Our sample is small for the number of parameters that have to be
estimated using parcels. Nevertheless, in parcel analyses that mirrored the
models generated by the manifest analyses (e.g., by constraining structural
weights to be equal), the path coefficients were in the same direction, and
most of the relevant paths were either significant or marginal.

MAIO, THOMAS, FINCHAM, AND CARNELLEY

314

Table 4
Cross-Lagged Analyses of Offense-Related and Family-Related Variables
Paths
Family relationship

Variable

Model fit

A

B

C

D

.47
.59,.62
.60,.63

.41
.50,.53
.51,.65

ⴚ.22
ⴚ.18,ⴚ.14
.14,.17

⫺.14
ⴚ.21,ⴚ.27
.09,.09

.61,.69
.65,.73
.62,.66
.66,.69

.55,.68
.43,.48
.62,.60
.45,.59

.05,.06
⫺.04,⫺.06
.09,.09
.01,.01

.14,.16
.20,.18
.12,.13
.21,.21

Offense-related variables
Child forgives father
Child and father forgive mother
Child and father forgive mother

Offense repetition
Offense repetition
Apology

n/a
.99,.03
1.00,.00

Child
Child
Child
Child

(Lack of) family conflict
Family expressiveness
Family cohesiveness
Family expressiveness

Family-related variables
and
and
and
and

mother forgive father
mother forgive father
father forgive mother
father forgive mother

.98,.07
.99,.05
1.00,.00
.99,.04

Note. ␤s are reported for each pair of paths when the path coefficients were not significantly different between both participant groups, with the ␤ for
the child–parent relationship left of the ␤ for the parent–parent relationship. Paths or pairs of paths are highlighted in bold when the two-tailed tests of the
relevant path coefficients exhibited p ⬍ .05. The model fit indices are comparative fit index (CFI) followed by root-mean-square error of approximation
(RMSEA). Good fit is indicated by CFI values near or above .95 and by RMSEA values near or below .08. n/a indicates that fit indices have no degrees
of freedom for the analysis.

with conflict with her. In these cases, it was appropriate to examine
simultaneously the cross-lagged stability model for both relationships with the common target. We began these analyses by testing
the manifest-level models across the two family members who
indicated their forgiveness of the other (e.g., across father forgives
mother and child forgives mother). This approach enables sequential tests of whether the structural model differs between the two
relationships by testing whether the imposition of equality constraints between the two groups significantly decreases model fit.
When our analyses revealed that equality constraints decreased fit,
we examined the model for each subgroup separately and noted the
effect obtained in each group. When equality constraints did not
worsen model fit, we examined the model that was held equal
across both groups. If the model yielded good indices of fit (i.e.,
comparative fit index ⬇ .95 or above and root-mean-square error ⬇ .08 or below) and evidence of construct stability over time
(i.e., significance in the non-crossed-lagged paths), we examined
the cross-lagged paths within the model. In order to fit the results
within the space of one report, we described only the cross-lagged
effects that were significant within the models that survived the
requirements for examination. When the correlations were different across the relationships with the same target, we examined
each relationship in a separate cross-lagged model.3

Results of Cross-Lagged Analyses
The cross-lagged analyses revealed that the tendency to repeat
an offense and the tendency to apologize were the main significant
antecedents of forgiveness, as shown in Table 4. Children (but not
mothers) who perceived high tendencies for the father to repeat
transgressions were less forgiving of him 1 year later. In addition,
both children and fathers who perceived high tendencies for the
mother to repeat transgressions were less forgiving of her 1 year
later, and children and fathers who perceived a greater tendency
for the mother to apologize were more likely to forgive her. Other
than these offense-related variables, there was one additional antecedent of forgiveness over the year: Children and fathers’ for-

giveness of the mother was lower 1 year after indicating less
resolution of conflict with her (Table 5).
Notwithstanding the importance of these particular antecedents,
the cross-lagged models revealed a much larger array of important
consequences of forgiveness (see Tables 4 and 5 as well as Table
6). At the family level, forgiveness of the father predicted more
family expressiveness and less family conflict 1 year later. Similarly, forgiveness of the mother predicted more family cohesiveness and more family expressiveness 1 year later. Forgiveness of
the child had no significant effects on the family-level environment indicators.
At the relationship level, there were diverse effects of forgiving
the mother (Tables 4, 5, and 6). Higher forgiveness of the mother
predicted less perceived repetition of her transgressions 1 year
later, stronger perceptions of being forgiven by her 1 year later,
less subsequent attachment dependence, marginally less attachment anxiety, less conflict frequency, and more closeness in the
relationship with her. There were very similar effects of forgiveness of the father. Higher forgiveness of the father predicted less
attachment dependence, marginally less attachment anxiety, and
less conflict frequency in the relationship with him. In addition, the
mother’s higher forgiveness of the father predicted stronger perceptions of being forgiven by him 1 year later and marginally
greater perceived relationship quality with him. There were four
significant effects in the parents’ relationship with the child:
3

We tested whether the models containing significant cross-lagged
effects were moderated by relationship length and family income and
whether effects uniquely involving forgiveness by the children or forgiveness of them were moderated by child sex and child age. The cross-lagged
paths were highly robust across these variables, with relatively few exceptions across analyses. It would have been useful to also test whether
equality constraints decreased model fit between groups nested within
families, but this would have resulted in a complex model with a large
number of free parameters, and we were not aware of a model for this
approach for designs with a longitudinal element.

FORGIVENESS IN FAMILIES

315

Table 5
Cross-Lagged Analyses of Relationship-Level Variables
Paths
Family relationships

Variable

Model fit

A

B

C

D

.60,.62
.63,.66
.68,.71
.53,.55
.64,.67

.40,.47
.37,.36
.41,.53
.42,.59
.40,.45

.09,.13
⫺.07, ⫺.08
.03,.04
ⴚ.20,ⴚ.23
.05,.05

.29,.26
ⴚ.27,ⴚ.28
ⴚ.13,ⴚ.14
ⴚ.17,ⴚ.13
.19,.19

.79
.78
.62,.68
.64,.71
.62,.68

.57
.73
.44,.52
.56,.56
.44,.54

⫺.07
⫺.04
⫺.04,⫺.05
.01,.00
⫺.04,⫺.04

.22
.14
ⴚ.19,ⴚ.20
ⴚ.11,ⴚ.12
ⴚ.16,ⴚ.19

.66,.66
.63,.62
.66,.66
.65,.65

.49,.45
.51,.43
.57,.56
.65,.68

.06,.05
⫺.10,⫺.08
.06,.06
.06,.06

.21,.25
ⴚ.21,ⴚ.21
.12,.14
.14,.15

Mother target
Child
Child
Child
Child
Child

and
and
and
and
and

father
father
father
father
father

forgive
forgive
forgive
forgive
forgive

mother
mother
mother
mother
mother

Perceptions of forgiveness
Attachment dependence
Attachment anxiety
(Low) conflict resolution
Closeness

.99,.06
1.00,.00
1.00,.00
.99,.04
.99,.05
Father target

Mother forgives father
Mother forgives father
Child and mother forgive father
Child and mother forgive father
Child and mother forgive father

Perceptions of forgiveness
Relationship quality
Attachment dependence
Attachment anxiety
Conflict frequency

n/a
n/a
.99,.06
.99,.05
.99,.04
Child target

Mother
Mother
Mother
Mother

and
and
and
and

father
father
father
father

forgive
forgive
forgive
forgive

child
child
child
child

Perceptions of forgiveness
(Low) conflict resolution
Closeness
Relationship quality

1.00,.00
1.00,.00
1.00,.00
1.00,.00

Note. ␤s are reported for each pair of paths when the path coefficients were not significantly different between both participant groups. The ␤ for the
child–parent relationship is left of the ␤ for the parent–parent relationship, or, when both parents’ forgiveness of child was examined, the ␤ for the
mother– child relationship is left of the ␤ for the father– child relationship. Paths or pairs of paths are highlighted in bold when the two-tailed tests of the
relevant path coefficients exhibited p ⬍ .05. Marginal paths ( p ⬍ .10) are in italics. The model fit indices are comparative fit index (CFI) followed by
root-mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA). Good fit is indicated by CFI values near or above .95 and by RMSEA values near or below .08. n/a
indicates that fit indices have no degrees of freedom for the analysis.

greater forgiveness of the child predicted stronger perceptions of
being forgiven by the child 1 year later, higher resolution of
conflicts with the child 1 year later, stronger feelings of closeness
to the child, and higher relationship quality with the child.
The longitudinal data revealed interesting evidence to help us to
interpret the correlations between family forgiveness and the personality traits that were described earlier and documented in prior
research. Specifically, they showed that forgiveness may predict
changes in individual traits and states over time (see Table 6).
Fathers and children exhibited more emotional stability and conscientiousness 1 year after reporting higher levels of forgiveness of
the mother. In addition, mothers and children exhibited higher

levels of agreeableness 1 year after reporting greater forgiveness of
the father. Also, fathers and mothers exhibited higher levels of
extraversion 1 year after reporting greater forgiveness of the child.
Overall, the longitudinal analyses are among the first to document important antecedents and consequences of forgiveness
across the family dyads. They are also consistent with our hypothesized difference between parent–parent and parent– child forgiveness. Specifically, parents’ forgiveness of children had fewer antecedents and consequences than did parents’ forgiveness of each
other; the set of obtained associations (as standardized betas) with
forgiveness over time in the parent-to-parent relationship was
significantly stronger than the same associations with forgiveness

Table 6
Cross-Lagged Analyses of Individual-Level Variables
Paths
Family relationships

Variable

Model fit

A

B

C

D

Child and father forgive mother
Child forgives mother
Child and mother forgive father
Mother and father forgive child

Emotional stability
Conscientiousness
Agreeableness
Extraversion

1.00,.01
1.00,.03
0.99,.05
1.00,.00

.69,.72
.70,.70
.62,.70
.68,.68

.43,.46
.63,.66
.46,.48
.78,.73

⫺.09,⫺.10
⫺.09,⫺.08
.02,.02
⫺.05,⫺.04

.17,.18
.09,.12
.15,.18
.09,.10

Note. ␤s are reported for each pair of paths when the path coefficients were not significantly different between both participant groups. The ␤ for the
child–parent relationship is left of the ␤ for the parent–parent relationship, or, when both parents’ forgiveness of child was examined, the ␤ for the
mother– child relationship is left of the ␤ for the father– child relationship. Paths or pairs of paths are highlighted in bold when the two-tailed tests of the
relevant path co-efficients exhibited p ⬍ .05. The model fit indices are comparative fit index (CFI) followed by root-mean-square error of approximation
(RMSEA). Good fit is indicated by CFI values near or above .95 and by RMSEA values near or below .08.

MAIO, THOMAS, FINCHAM, AND CARNELLEY

316

over time in the parent-to-child relationship, T (Wilcoxon’s
matched pairs) ⫽ 1.97, p ⬍ .05. Thus, the pattern of associations
over time corroborated the cross-sectional evidence supporting our
central hypothesis concerning the importance of relationship context for forgiveness.4

Discussion
Prior models of forgiveness pay limited attention to the broader
context in which forgiveness occurs. Our research shows that the
nature of the relationship between transgressor and victim merits a
central role in understanding forgiveness because the antecedents
and consequences of forgiveness varied significantly across different types of family relationships. This longitudinal study also
helps to address prior speculations about antecedents and consequences of forgiveness using our new measures of forgiveness in
families, which exhibited high reliability and stability across time
in all of the family dyads studied.
Strong, broad evidence of concurrent validity emerged from the
within-wave correlations between forgiveness and the individuallevel, relationship-level, and family-level variables, correlations
that were consistent with prior theories about forgiveness. At the
individual level, forgiveness of family members was higher among
parents and children who exhibited lower levels of anxiety, depression, and aggression (measured for children only), but higher
levels of trait forgiveness and higher need for approval, selfesteem, agreeableness, conscientiousness, emotional stability, extraversion, and intellect. As expected, this pattern of associations
was weaker for parents’ forgiveness of their children, which supports our hypothesis about the nonsupererogatory nature of child
forgiveness. In theory, the tendency for forgiveness to preclude
avoidance or vengeance toward children makes forgiveness of
children a requirement of evolution. In contrast, forgiveness of
parents (by each other or by children) is only indirectly related to
the likelihood of genetic continuation.
Additional evidence for the validity of our approach came from
the discovery that, at the relationship level, forgiveness exhibited
unique concurrent correlates in each dyad. Forgiveness in a dyad
was uniquely associated with the likelihood of apology, the tendency to repeat offenses, dependent and anxious attachment, relationship quality, relationship closeness, and relationship conflict.
All of these relations were independent of the forgiver’s relationship with the family member outside the dyad. There were also
significant levels of judge–target agreement in forgiveness and
perceived reciprocity in forgiveness. Nonetheless, as expected,
fathers were significantly less likely to perceive forgiveness from
their children than from their spouses, consistent with our hypothesis about lower father communication with children. Overall, the
dyad-level results further support the importance of examining
forgiveness in the broader relationship context.
Finally, at the family level, higher forgiveness of other family
members in each of the six dyads was correlated with a more
positive experience in the family environment. Of interest, these
relations were weakest when we examined fathers’ forgiveness of
the child and mother. This finding fits evolutionary predictions
about greater potential for father detachment from family relationships and is consistent with some additional findings described in
the following sections.

Roles of Forgiveness in Families
From a theoretical perspective, the most important advance of
this research was the emergence of longitudinal data to support the
operation of different forgiveness-related mechanisms in different
family relationships. Children’s forgiveness was particularly sensitive to whether the transgressor repeated an offense or apologized. Children were less likely to forgive when they perceived
tendencies for either parent to repeat an offense. In addition,
apologies from mothers, but not from fathers, were more likely to
cause increased forgiveness of the mother over time. These results
broadly support prior conclusions from studies that have examined
children’s responses to vignettes describing possible reactions to
apologies from transgressions (Darby & Schlenker, 1982). Moreover, the null effect of father’s apology on the child’s forgiveness
of him is interesting in light of the fact that children were not more
likely to perceive forgiveness from fathers who reported forgiving
them, and fathers were not more likely to perceive forgiveness
from children who reported forgiving them. From an evolutionary
perspective (D. M. Buss, 1996; Trivers, 1985), it is relatively easy
for fathers to become detached from relationship processes with
their children. This detachment is made even more important by
the fact that fathers and children both tended to reciprocate perceived forgiveness. As a result, fathers and children may end up
reciprocating inequitably: They forgive when they have not been
forgiven themselves and are unforgiving when they have been
forgiven. In fact, this pattern may explain why children’s forgiveness of the father did not predict increased closeness and relationship quality in the relationship with him 1 year later. Again, greater
father detachment is consistent with this result.
These observations do not detract from a number of other effects
of forgiveness within the relationship between parents and in the
relationships between the children and each parent. Higher forgiveness of both the mother and the father (by each other and by
the child) predicted less subsequent attachment dependence and
attachment anxiety 1 year later. The mother’s forgiveness of the
father also predicted better feelings about the quality of the relationship with him and more closeness to him. In addition, children
who reported high forgiveness also reported greater perceptions of
having been forgiven by each parent 1 year later (except when the
child rated perceptions of forgiveness from the father). These
relations were consistent with the effects of forgiveness on the
family environment as a whole. At the family level, forgiveness of
the father and of the mother predicted more expressiveness in the
family, less family conflict (when the father was forgiven), and
more family cohesiveness (when the mother was forgiven) 1 year
later. Thus, despite mixed effects of forgiveness in the father– child
relationship, forgiveness of the parents by each other and by the
4

An important set of models examines the reciprocal or synchronous
effects of the Wave 2 variables on each other, while controlling for the
stability of each variable over time. These models can be tested if the
cross-lagged paths are set to zero and the Wave 1 variables are assumed to
be predetermined, exogenous variables that are uncorrelated with the
disturbance terms for both Wave 2 variables. Our tests of these models
revealed that most of the cross-lagged paths were reflected in the withinWave-2 paths, despite our allowing for synchronous effects. This evidence
may indicate a shorter time course of effects than the 1-year-long period
covered by our study (Fincham et al., 1997).

FORGIVENESS IN FAMILIES

child has important consequences for their dyadic relationships
and for family experiences more generally. Such effects are consistent with social learning theory and systems models that stress
the dynamic interplay and spillover between family subsystems
(Margolin, Christensen, & John, 1996).
We also expected parents’ forgiveness of children to have a less
complex set of antecedents and consequences than children’s
forgiveness of parents or parents’ forgiveness of each other, because parental forgiveness of their children is an evolved requirement of their role. Consistent with this hypothesis, our data revealed a significantly weaker set of individual-level, relationshiplevel, or family-level antecedents and consequences of parental
forgiveness of the child than of interparental forgiveness. Although
it is conceivable that other relationship factors also contribute to
this pattern (e.g., children’s relatively low power), we expect that
such evidence would fit our fundamental argument about
relationship-specificity and the evolutionary explanation more
generally.
Of course, effects in both parent–parent and parent– child relationships were evident and important. The obtained effects on
perceptions of forgiveness, in particular, are important because
they provide an interesting answer to the issue of whether effects
on perceived reciprocity emerge over time. Prior cross-sectional
analyses of transgression-related motivations have revealed that
family members report forgiving those who they believe tend to
forgive them (Hoyt et al., 2005). Our data extended this reciprocity
finding by identifying a temporal direction of effects. For example,
parents’ earlier reports of forgiveness predicted their later perceptions of forgiveness from their children. This finding supports the
notion that children learn forgiveness behavior modeled by their
parents, an important value transmission from parents to children
(Zimet & Jacob, 2001). Similar effects were observed in the other
relationships. Thus, forgiveness is to some extent mimicked in
relationships, and this may explain the important consequences for
the relationships and family environment, consistent with our
emphasis on the need to make relationships central in the analysis
of forgiveness.
Another important result was that forgiveness has consequences
for personality and individual adjustment. Cross-sectional correlations with personality traits are routinely interpreted as evidence of
the causal impacts of the traits. Yet, our longitudinal data yielded
little evidence to support such inferences. Instead, they pointed to
the opposite direction of effects in that forgiveness predicted
higher conscientiousness (fathers and children), emotional stability
(fathers and children), agreeableness (mothers and children), and
extraversion (fathers and mothers) 1 year after participants reported greater forgiveness of a parent or child. Although these
longitudinal effects differed somewhat across relationships, the
general pattern indicated that forgiveness of another family member increases levels of the traits.
We expect that these effects emerged because the present context involved the examination of traits and forgiveness over an
extended period of time in close relationships. This context entails
consistently high social interdependence over a long period of
time. To the extent that family relationships set prototypes or
models for other relationships, as predicted by theorizing on both
attachment (Bowlby, 1969) and the dynamic interplay between
close relationships and personality (Cooper, 2002), then these
effects of forgiveness should generalize to broader behaviors and

317

traits (i.e., emotional stability, agreeableness, extraversion, and
conscientiousness) outside the family context (Robins et al., 2002).
It is important for future research to probe these effects further,
meeting calls to examine subfacets of these broad personality
dimensions (Paunonen & Ashton, 2001) and calls for longitudinal
assessments over repeated intervals (Biesanz, West, & Kwok,
2003).
An interesting finding, given the wide-ranging consequences of
forgiveness on individual, relationship, and family development,
was that few variables emerged as antecedents of forgiveness.
However, caution should be exercised in generalizing this result to
other family contexts. It is possible, for example, that the propensity to forgive is moderated by relationship length. In wellestablished marriages and families, such as those in the current
study, it is likely that the norms of forgiveness are established and
less malleable to the influence of distal personality, dyadic, and
family-level variables (Cooper, 2002; Robins et al., 2002).5

Directions for Future Research
A difficulty with longitudinal designs is that there is often no
way to prefigure the correct time interval for detecting the processes at work. In the present case, we do not know whether the
1-year interval between waves was sufficient to reveal all of the
causal processes. This creates some difficulty in estimating the
magnitude of any hypothesized causal relationship between forgiveness and its correlates. The interval used in our study may be
much longer or shorter than the time period in which some of the
causal effects actually occur, and either case would result in
underestimation of any hypothesized effects. It is relevant that
most of the effects of forgiveness were replicated in separate
nonrecursive models that controlled for Wave 1 responding (see
Footnote 3). Although this pattern cannot be used to estimate the
“correct” time lag, it does suggest that the effects may occur over
a relatively shorter time period than 1 year (Fincham et al., 1997).
Nevertheless, two-wave cross-lagged designs are not themselves
sufficient to make strong inferences about causal processes. Although they are significant improvements on cross-sectional designs, they should be supplemented by multiwave designs and
experimental evidence.
This evidence reinforces the importance of research examining
mechanisms through which families shape personality and general
relationship processes for informing family therapies (see Cooper,
2002). This understanding of mechanism may also be facilitated by
our measure’s focus on the desired progression from negative to
positive relationship attitudes. There are diverse ways in which
people may change their attitudes. For example, people may attempt reasoning processes that reattribute another person’s bad
behavior to external causes, or they may simply attempt to suppress reminders of past bad deeds (Maio & Thomas, 2007). In the
family context, particularly expressive family members (e.g.,
wives) may be better at providing explanations for their actions,
helping the reattribution process, whereas the less loquacious
family members (e.g., husbands) may force victims to rely on a
5
The obtained effects were virtually the same after we controlled for the
likelihood of repeated offense, which may be another factor that affects a
person’s forgivability.

MAIO, THOMAS, FINCHAM, AND CARNELLEY

318

suppression mechanism. In each case, people might report conscious attempts at attitude transformation on the new measure of
forgiveness, but these attempts will be elicited by different selfpersuasion processes (see Maio & Thomas, 2007).
Moreover, it would be useful to examine the process of forgiveness in diverse cultural contexts because of a number of relevant
cultural differences in attribution (Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001). Cultures may also vary in the extent to which they
view children as causal agents. Some cultures may regard children
as being more capable of being responsible for what they do, and
these cultures might have weaker norms for forgiving children. An
interesting question is whether such cultures are more or less
successful or, more provocatively, are more or less likely to ensure
gene replication over the long term.
In sum, the present study is the first to provide longitudinal data
showing that forgiveness has an important role that varies across
family relationships. Numerous publications make clear that
family-centered therapies are now a common way to tackle diverse
psychological issues. Implicit in the use of these therapies is the
notion that processes in the family leave lasting marks on the
individual. The results presented in this article add substantial
impetus to this claim. Moreover, the findings uniquely highlight
the importance of examining the role of forgiveness across different types of relationships. It is provocative that the process of
forgiveness is quite different in those relationships that may have
evolved to regard forgiveness as a duty (e.g., due to parental role)
compared with those relationships wherein forgiveness has fewer
direct ramifications for genetic transmission.

References
Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Integrative guide to the 1991 CBCL/4–18, YSR,
and TRF profiles. Burlington: University of Vermont Department of
Psychiatry.
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., & Smollen, D. (1992). Inclusion of Other in the Self
Scale and the structure of interpersonal closeness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 63, 596 – 612.
Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A., & Wotman, S. R. (1990). Victim and
perpetrator accounts of interpersonal conflict: Autobiographical narratives about anger. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59,
994 –1005.
Beck, A. T., & Beck, R. W. (1972). Shortened version of BDI. Postgraduate Medicine, 52, 81– 85.
Biesanz, J. C., West, S. G., & Kwok, O. M. (2003). Personality over time:
Methodological approaches to the study of short-term and long-term
development and change. Journal of Personality, 71, 905–941.
Botta, R. A., & Dumlao, R. (2002). How do conflict and communication
patterns between fathers and daughters contribute to or offset eating
disorders? Health Communication, 14, 199 –219.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York:
Basic Books.
Buss, D. M. (1996). The evolutionary psychology of human social strategies. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology:
Handbook of basic principles (pp. 3–38). New York: Guilford Press.
Buss, A. H., & Durkee, A. (1957). An inventory for assessing different
kinds of hostility. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21, 343–349.
Caspi, A., Roberts, B. W., & Shiner, R. L. (2005). Personality development: Stability and change. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 453– 484.
Collins, N. L., & Read, S. J. (1990). Adult attachment, working models,
and relationship quality in dating couples. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 58, 644 – 663.

Cook, W. L. (2000). Understanding attachment security in family context.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 285–294.
Cooper, L. M. (2002). Personality and close relationships: Embedding
people in important social contexts. Journal of Personality, 70, 757–782.
Cords, M., & Aureli, F. (2000). Reconciliation and relationship qualities. In
F. Aureli & F. B. M. de Waal (Eds.), Natural conflict resolution (pp.
177–198). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Darby, B. W., & Schlenker, B. R. (1982). Children’s reactions to apologies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 742–753.
de Waal, F. B. M. (1997). Bonobo: The forgotten ape. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
de Waal, F. B. M. (2000, July 28). Primates: A natural heritage of conflict
resolution. Science, 289, 586 –590.
Fincham, F. D. (2000). The kiss of the porcupines: From attributing
responsibility to forgiving. Personal Relationships, 7, 1–23.
Fincham, F. D., Beach, S. R. H., & Davila, J. (2004). Forgiveness and
conflict resolution in marriage. Journal of Family Psychology, 18, 72–
81.
Fincham, F. D., Beach, S. R. H., Harold, G. T., & Osborne, L. N. (1997).
Marital satisfaction and depression: Different causal relationships for
men and women? Psychological Science, 8, 351–357.
Fincham, F. D., Harold, G. T., & Gano-Phillips, S. (2000). The longitudinal
association between attributions and marital satisfaction: Direction of
effects and role of efficacy expectations. Journal of Family Psychology,
14, 267–285.
Fletcher, G. J., Simpson, J. A., & Thomas, G. (2000). The measurement of
perceived relationship quality components: A confirmatory factor analytic approach. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 340 –
354.
Goldberg, L. R. (1992). The development of markers for the Big Five
factor structure. Psychological Assessment, 4, 26 – 42.
Grych, J. H., Seid, M., & Fincham, F. D. (1992). Assessing marital conflict
from the child’s perspective: The Children’s Perception of Intraparental
Conflict Scale. Child Development, 63, 558 –572.
Harter, S. (1985). Manual of the Self-Perception Profile for Children.
Denver, CO: University of Denver.
Hayley, W. E., & Strickland, B. R. (1986). Interpersonal betrayal and
cooperation: Effects on self-evaluation in depression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 386 –391.
Holahan, C. J., & Moos, R. H. (1983). The quality of social support:
Measures of family and work relationships. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 22, 157–162.
Hoyt, W. T., Fincham, F. D., McCullough, M. E., Maio, G. R., & Davila,
J. (2005). Responses to interpersonal transgressions in families: Forgivingness, forgivability, and relationship-specific effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 375–394.
Kachadourian, L. K., Fincham, F. D., & Davila, J. (2004). The tendency to
forgive in dating and married couples: The role of attachment and
relationship satisfaction. Personal Relationships, 11, 373–393.
Kachadourian, L. K., Fincham, F. D., & Davila, J. (2005). Attitudinal
ambivalence, rumination, and forgiveness of partner transgressions in
marriage. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 334 –342.
Karremans, J. C., Van Lange, P. A. M., & Holland, R. W. (2005).
Forgiveness and its associations with prosocial thinking, feelings, and
doing beyond the relationship with the offender. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 31, 1315–1326.
Karremans, J. C., Van Lange, P. A. M., Ouwerkerk, J. W., & Kluwer, E. S.
(2003). When forgiving enhances psychological well-being: The role of
interpersonal commitment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 1011–1026.
Kenrick, D. T., Li, N. P., & Butner, J. (2003). Dynamical evolutionary
psychology: Individual decision rules and emergent social norms. Psychological Review, 110, 3–28.
Kenrick, D. T., & Trost, M. R. (1997). Evolutionary approaches to rela-

FORGIVENESS IN FAMILIES
tionships. In S. Duck (Ed.), Handbook of personal relationships: Theory,
research and interventions (2nd ed., pp. 151–177). New York: Wiley.
Kenrick, D. T., Trost, M. R., & Sundie, J. M. (2004). Sex roles as
adaptations: An evolutionary perspective on gender differences and
similarities. In A. H. Eagly, A. E. Beall, & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), The
psychology of gender (2nd ed., pp. 65–91). New York: Guilford Press.
Kornhaber, M., & Marcos, H. (2000). Young children’s communication
with mothers and fathers: Functions and contents. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology, 18, 187–210.
Kovacs, M. (1981). Rating scales to assess depression in school-aged
children. Acta Paedopsychiatrica, 46, 305–315.
Little, T. D., Cunningham, W. A., Shahar, G., & Widaman, K. F. (2002).
To parcel or not to parcel: Exploring the question, weighing the merits.
Structural Equation Modeling, 9, 151–173.
Luebbert, M. C. (1999). The survival value of forgiveness. In D. H. Rosen
& M. C. Luebbert (Eds.), Evolution of the psyche (pp. 169 –187).
Westport, CT: Prager/Greenwood.
Maio, G. R., Fincham, F. D., & Lycett, E. J. (2000). Attitudinal ambivalence toward parents and attachment style. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1451–1464.
Maio, G. R., & Thomas, G. (2007). The epistemic–teleologic model of
deliberate self-persuasion. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
11, 46 – 67.
Margolin, G., Christensen, A., & John, R. S. (1996). The continuance and
spillover of everyday tensions in distressed and nondistressed families.
Journal of Family Psychology, 10, 304 –321.
McCullough, M. E., & Hoyt, W. T. (2002). The forgiver in context:
Personal and situational determinants of forgiveness. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1556 –1573.
McCullough, M. E., Rachal, K. C., Sandage, S. J., Worthington, E. L. Jr.,
Brown, S. W., & Hight, T. L. (1998). Interpersonal forgiving in close
relationships: II. Theoretical elaboration and measurement. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 1586 –1603.
McCullough, M. E., Worthington, E. L. Jr., & Rachal, K. C. (1997).
Interpersonal forgiving in close relationships. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 73, 321–336.
Mikulincer, M., Shaver, P. R., & Slav, K. (2006). Attachment, mental
representations of others, and gratitude and forgiveness in romantic
relationships. In M. Mikulincer & G. Goodman (Eds.), Dynamics of
romantic love: Attachment, caregiving, and sex (pp. 190 –215). New
York: Guilford.
Moos, R., & Moos, B. (1981). Family Environment Scale manual. Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

319

Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001). Culture and
systems of thought: Holistic versus analytic cognition. Psychological
Review, 108, 291–310.
Paleari, G. F., Regalia, C., & Fincham, F. D. (2005). Marital quality,
forgiveness, empathy, and rumination: A longitudinal analysis. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 368 –378.
Paulhus, D. L. (1991). Measurement and control of response bias. In J. P.
Robinson, P. R. Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of
personality and social psychological attitudes (pp. 17–59). San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Paunonen, S. V., & Ashton, M. C. (2001). Big Five factors and facets and
the prediction of behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 524 –539.
Reynolds, C. R., & Richmond, B. O. (1978). What I think and feel: A
revised measure of children’s manifest anxiety. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 6, 271–280.
Reynolds, W. M. (1982). Development of reliable and valid short forms of
the Marlowe–Crowne Social Desirability Scale. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 38, 119 –125.
Robins, R. W., Caspi, A., & Moffit, T. E. (2002). It’s not just who you’re
with, it’s who you are: Personality and relationship experiences across
multiple relationships. Journal of Personality, 70, 925–964.
Rosenberg, M. (1979). Conceiving the self. New York: Basic Books.
Seiffge-Krenke, I. (2002). “Come on, say something, Dad!” Communication and coping in fathers of diabetic adolescents. Journal of Pediatric
Psychology, 27, 439 – 450.
Spielberger, C. D., Gorsuch, R. L., & Lushene, R. E. (1970). The State–
Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) Test Manual for Form X. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychology Press.
Tangney, J., Fee, R., Reinsmith, C., Boone, A. L., & Lee, E. (1999,
August). Assessing individual differences in the propensity to forgive.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological
Association, Boston.
Trivers, R. (1985). Social evolution. Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin/
Cummings.
Zimet, D. M., & Jacob, T. (2001). Influences of marital conflict on child
adjustment: Review of theory and research. Clinical Child and Family
Psychology Review, 4, 319 –335.

Received November 30, 2006
Revision received July 12, 2007
Accepted July 15, 2007 䡲

