Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 1, 108 –115

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.1.108

Neurocognitive Underpinnings of Face Perception:
Further Evidence of Distinct Person and Group Perception Processes
Michael A. Zárate and Colby J. Stoever

M. Kimberly MacLin

University of Texas at El Paso

University of Northern Iowa

Clarissa J. Arms-Chavez
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

University of Texas at El Paso
A model of social perception is presented and tested. The model is based on cognitive neuroscience
models and proposes that the right cerebral hemisphere is more efficient at processing combinations of
features whereas the left hemisphere is superior at identifying single features. These processes are
hypothesized to produce person and group-based representations, respectively. Individuating or personalizing experience with an outgroup member was expected to facilitate the perception of the individuating
features and inhibit the perception of the group features. In the presented study, participants were asked
to learn about various ingroup and outgroup targets. Later, participants demonstrated that categorization
response speeds to old targets were slower in the left hemisphere than in the right, particularly for
outgroup members, as predicted. These findings are discussed for their relevance to models of social
perception and stereotyping.
Keywords: social perception, stereotyping, social neuroscience, face perception

dox, 1999), and those distinctions point to some long-standing
issues within social psychology. Is social perception a single
continuum from group to person perception, or are there dual
processes that produce distinct outputs? The distinctions between
serial and parallel processes for person and group perceptions have
been at the center of a long debate, but the mechanisms through
which they operate have been somewhat ignored. Although dualprocess models are not without criticism (Kruglanski et al., 2003),
we argue that the competing demands of social categorization and
person perception support the need for dual-process models in
social perception. We further argue that cerebral hemispheric
asymmetries in perception match well with the basic distinctions in
social perception.

How is it that experience with outgroup members often fails to
influence judgments regarding the actual outgroup? One can identify numerous studies showing how people are categorized by race
and gender (Ito & Urland, 2003, 2005; Lepore & Brown, 1997;
Stroessner, 1996; Zárate & Smith, 1990), but few, if any, studies
investigate face perception processes regarding familiar others.
Because people can be categorized any number of ways, it seems
that even minimal interactions with others can influence how they
are perceived later. Just as important, recent work showing dissociations between person and group perceptions (Zárate, Sanders, &
Garza, 2000) suggest that familiarity with a person should impact
later group categorizations as a function of the prior experience.
The dissociations between attitudes toward a person and attitudes
toward the associated group also suggest that person and group
perceptions are distinct processes. Presented below is a recently
developed model of social perception. It is based on multiple
findings within the neuroscience literature and contends that social
perception is driven by two distinct systems. Finally, new predictions are developed to test how familiarity with a person impacts
interhemispheric communication for ingroup and outgroup members.
Research shows that person and group perception processes are
distinct (Hamilton & Sherman, 1996; Hamilton, Sherman, & Mad-

A Neurocognitive Model of Social Perception
The basis for this model lies in the recognition that person
perception and group categorization require attending to different
properties of the person and appear to occur at different stages
(Lui, Harris, & Kanwisher, 2002). Individual person perception
requires that an individual’s face be processed and recognized. For
face recognition, combinations of features and the ways in which
those features relate to each other are particularly important. Almost all models of face recognition entail a feature integration
process consistent with the visual processing that normally occurs
in the right hemisphere (Farah, Wilson, Drain, & Tanaka, 1998).
Recognition requires attending to the overall spatial configuration
of internal facial features (i.e., eyes, nose, and mouth) and how
those features relate to each other. Specific features, such as when
a close friend starts wearing eyeglasses or shaves off or grows a
beard, have little impact on recognition processes. In fact, perceivers often cannot identify when a major facial feature has changed.

Michael A. Zárate, Colby J. Stoever, and Clarissa J. Arms-Chavez,
Department of Psychology, University of Texas at El Paso; M. Kimberly
MacLin, Department of Psychology, University of Northern Iowa.
This research is based on work supported by National Institute of Mental
Health Grant MH47167-14 awarded to Michael A. Zárate.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Michael
A. Zárate, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at El Paso, El
Paso, TX 79968. E-mail: mzarate@utep.edu
108

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

FACE PERCEPTION

A person can start wearing eyeglasses or shave a beard and close
friends are often able to say he or she looks different but are unable
to identify how the person changed.
Group categorization, in contrast, requires attending to specific
or single features within the face. For example, race perception
often requires attending to one feature: skin color (Levin, 1996). A
simple mask like that worn by the fictional Zorro can inhibit face
recognition but does little to inhibit gender categorization. Thus,
although individuating information is lost, group category information is still available. The attention to similar features across an
array of items produces the abstraction or semantic representation
of the features. The feature integration process necessary for
person identification can be independent of the feature identification process necessary for group categorization. If one finds distinct mechanisms in each hemisphere that produce different representations, it would further support the distinctions between
person and group perceptions.
Our model accounts for person versus group distinctions by
hypothesizing that social perception entails two parallel processes
(Zárate et al., 2000). One process more efficiently identifies the
individuating characteristics of others, whereas the other process is
better at identifying social category membership features. These
processes work together to produce various person and group
dissociations. The mediating mechanisms entail how the cerebral
hemispheres process visual information. The right cerebral hemisphere is more adept at identifying combinations of features and
using those features to distinguish one exemplar from another. The
left cerebral hemisphere is particularly adept at identifying salient
features to identify commonalities and differences across a number
of different exemplars (Marsolek, 1999; Navon, 1977; Weissman
& Banich, 1999). In essence, the processing conducted by the right
hemisphere is an interactive-cue process, and the processing conducted by the left hemisphere is an additive-cue process (Medin &
Smith, 1981). Interactive-cue processes produce exemplar representations, whereas additive-cue processes produce prototype representations. The feature integration encoding mechanisms favored
by the right hemisphere more often bias the system to retrieve
exemplar-like social representations. The abstract representations
produced by the left hemisphere more often prime or lead to
schematic or group-based memory retrieval representations of
social stimuli (Cabeza & Nyberg, 2000). These encoding asymmetries bias the system to produce more concrete person-based
representations or more abstract group-level representations, respectively.

Prior Support
In three sets of studies, Zárate, Sanders, and colleagues (Sanders, McClure, & Zárate, 2004; Zárate et al., 2000; Zárate &
Sanders, 2004) found preliminary support for these cerebral asymmetries in social perception. Consistently, the right and left hemispheres demonstrated qualitatively different responses to the same
stimuli. In Zárate et al. (2000), the right hemisphere demonstrated
memory for specific faces via a mere exposure effect (Zajonc,
1968) in Experiment 1 and exemplar-driven categorization patterns in Experiment 3. In contrast, the left hemisphere demonstrated evaluative priming for outgroup members in Experiment 2
(Dovidio, Evans, & Tyler, 1986; Zárate & Smith, 1990) and
prototype-like processing within a gender categorization task in

109

Experiment 3 (Zárate & Sanders, 1999). The studies demonstrated
that the right hemisphere was superior at processing person- or
instance-based information and the left hemisphere was superior at
processing group-level information.
Sanders et al. (2004) further demonstrated differential learning
patterns across the hemispheres. After participants were classically
conditioned to respond to pictures of one particular bearded man
presented with numerous pictures of other nonbearded men, participants were presented with a series of new photos. New photos
included new bearded men, new nonbearded men, and the targets
presented earlier. Galvanic skin responses (GSR) were used to
measure participants’ responses. When targets were presented to
the right hemisphere, participants responded with a heightened
GSR to only the specific bearded man. When items were presented
to the left hemisphere, however, participants responded with a
heightened GSR to all of the bearded men. Thus, the right hemisphere responded to the person, whereas the left hemisphere responded to the group category bearded men.
These general effects support other research by Golby, Gabrieli,
Chiao, and Eberhardt (2001). Golby et al., using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), demonstrated that participants
had differential response patterns to same-race and other-race
targets. From that, they argued that “left-hemisphere pathways
may mediate categorical visual processes that maximize similarities among examples in a category, whereas right-hemisphere
pathways may mediate coordinate visual processes that maximize
individuation between examples in a category” (Golby et al., 2001,
p. 847). The reported research builds on this past research to
further disentangle how person and group perceptions work together to produce a coherent mental representation of the social
world.
In this model, cerebral asymmetries mean that the system has
processing biases. It does not mean that the left hemisphere houses
group processing abilities and that the right hemisphere houses
person-based processes. In fact, either encoding process can produce either type of outcome. Ito and Urland (2005), for instance,
using event-related potential (ERP) methodologies, showed that
categorical processing appears to be independent of structural
(person) processing. They also contend that person and categorical
processing can be accomplished through a myriad of processes.
Consistent with that, we argue that these differential processing
systems are only biased to process information differently and that
those processing asymmetries produce distinct social perception
outcomes. Thus, the systems are biased to produce differential
outputs but are capable of producing and do produce multiple
outputs (Cabeza & Kato, 2000).

Is Social Perception Special?
It is difficult to directly extend the neurological literature to
social psychology. The neurological substrates of face perception
processes are well studied and highly debated. Some researchers
contend that face perception is special and dominated by the right
cerebral hemisphere (Hillger & Koenig, 1991; Parr, Dove, &
Hopkins, 1998; for reviews, see Bruce & Humphreys, 1994, or De
Renzi, Perani, Cartesimo, Silveri, & Fazio, 1994) and, in particular, associated with the fusiform gyrus of the right hemisphere
(McCarthy, Puce, Gore, & Allison, 1997; Moscovitch, Winocur, &
Behrmann, 1997). The associated research on this issue subsumes

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

110

ZÁRATE, STOEVER, MACLIN, AND ARMS-CHAVEZ

neurological imaging studies that question if faces are processed
by a specific fusiform face area or whether the processes are
distributed across a range of neurological substrates (Cohen &
Tong, 2001; Haxby et al., 2001). The debate also covers experimental manipulations that show, for instance, that inversion disrupts the accurate perception of faces more than the perception of
other stimuli (Valentine, 1988). The fact that face perception is
more disrupted than other stimuli by that manipulation suggests
that face perception is special.
Others contend, however, that face perception is simply very
well practiced and that any effects unique to faces represent
expertise more than some particular perceptional mechanism (Diamond & Carey, 1986). Indeed, comprehensive reviews specific to
the modular versus distributed approach to face perception are
inconclusive (e.g., Cohen & Tong, 2001). Nevertheless, at the very
least, research shows that face perception is differentiated from
nonsocial perception very early in the visual process, at least at 170
ms, showing distinct processing at a relatively early stage (Ito,
Thompson, & Cacioppo, 2004). The fact that race perception
appears to occur even before structural face processing, at about
120 ms, (Ito & Urland, 2003) indicates that basic group membership processes are particularly important in the perception stream.
Extensions of the neurological literature to the social psychological realm are made more difficult because most studies equate
social perception with person recognition. Social categorization
tasks are rarely used in neuroimaging studies, yet categorization
processes have multiple important social psychological ramifications. With the emergence of social neuropsychological research,
however, some group categorization studies have emerged. Ito and
Urland (2003), for instance, showed that race processing appears
to start at about 122 ms and that the early effects are larger for
other-race targets than for same-race targets. Their later research
(Ito & Urland, 2005) included an individuation task, but they did
not investigate how that task impacted later group processing,
which is central to this research. Wheeler and Fiske (2005) also
used an individuation task in which people are asked to make
inferences about the vegetable preferences of the presented targets.
Their research also supports the basic distinctions presented in this
model. In particular, during the social categorization task, participants demonstrated an enhanced amygdala response in the left
hemisphere only. In the individuation task, however, activity in the
right amygdala differed across the White and Black targets. Thus,
at multiple levels, one can find support for the general hypothesis
that the left hemisphere appears to process group-level information, whereas the right hemisphere appears to process individuallevel information.

race for Black targets. Similarly, Wheeler and Fiske (2005) found
with White participants that during an individuation task, White
participants show that right cerebral amygdala activation is reduced for Black targets. Because race is generally more important
for other-race targets than for same-race targets, one can assume
that race perception is a default process for other-race targets more
so than for same-race targets. Outgroup homogeneity studies show
that individuals attend more to the individuating features of targets
of their gender than of targets of another gender (Park & Rothbart,
1982). These results also suggest that under normal circumstances,
targets of the same race and same gender as observers are normally
perceived as individuals more so than as group members. Thus,
personalizing experiences, for instance, would likely interfere
more with individuals’ perceptions of other-race and other-gender
targets than for same-race and same-gender targets.
Given the possibility that face perception is special and that the
neurocognitive literature uses a small subset of social perception
tasks, it is incumbent on social psychologists to test fully any
particular hypotheses rather than to merely transport neurocognitive constructs to social psychology. To do that, in the research
here, we use a divided visual field task. Stimuli are presented
briefly to either the right visual field or the left visual field,
referred to as a hemifield. Information is then processed first by the
contralateral hemisphere. Items presented to the right visual field
are processed first by the left hemisphere. Items presented to the
left visual field are processed first by the right hemisphere. The
primary advantage to this methodology is that the methods are
similar to those of many social psychological experiments and
allows many researchers to test social factors with relative ease to
build a theoretical and empirical base on which to develop further
neuroimaging studies.
Regarding hemifield studies, research often shows gender differences across lateralization patterns. For example, Kilgore and
Yurgelun-Todd (2001) showed that during the perception of happy
and fearful faces, men demonstrated greater hemispheric asymmetries than did women. Similarly, studies using a local– global
visual task (Roalf, Lowery, & Turetsky, 2006) often find greater
male cerebral asymmetries than female asymmetries. In a typical
local-global task, small stimuli (local), often letters, are embedded
in a larger array (global) that are often arranged to make a different
letter. The left hemisphere is generally more adept at identifying
the smaller or local stimuli, whereas the right hemisphere is
generally more adept at identifying the larger array. Not all studies
produce gender differences, however, and sometimes those effects
are relatively weak (Hiscock, Perachio, & Inch, 2001). Because
gender represents a fundamental social category, we examine
gender differences in the present research.

Social Categorization Moderators
Finally, any social extension of a neurocognitive model must
account for the degree to which race or gender is differentially
salient as a function of both perceiver and target characteristics
(Zárate & Smith, 1990). Target race is more salient when one is
perceiving other-race targets (Stroessner, 1996). This is evident in
social categorization studies and in face recognition studies. For
example, Stroessner showed that White participants appear to
automatically attend to race for Black targets but not White targets.
Black targets are perceived by race faster than are White targets,
and White participants are relatively unable to avoid attending to

Person Versus Group Judgments: Inhibitory Phenomena
In the current research, we advance prior work by considering
how the cerebral hemispheres work together to produce basic
social psychological phenomena. There are a number of potential
models for how the hemispheres cooperate. Many nonsocial models find support for the inhibitory-interaction hypothesis, which
maintains that activating the dominant hemisphere will inhibit the
same processes in the nondominant hemisphere. Theoretically,
once an output is produced, it works to inhibit alternative outputs
(Rutherford & Lutz, 2004). Rutherford and Lutz (2004) found this

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

FACE PERCEPTION

effect with the use of word conditions when the left hemisphere
was first activated and then deactivated but not with the right
hemisphere. Interhemispheric competition is also affected by the
bilateral effect where information presented to the nondominant
hemisphere will transfer efficiently to the dominant hemisphere.
Thus, information processing consistent with the normal processing mode is processed easily and quickly transferred to the other
hemisphere. Interference occurs when the information being transferred from the nondominant hemisphere competes with the information presented directly to the dominant hemisphere for processing capability. The information presented to the nondominant
hemisphere will eventually just give way and inhibit that information (Jordan & Patching, 2003; Olk & Hartje, 2001).
Because people can be categorized any number of ways, social
perception models must include some response inhibition mechanism. Without an inhibition process, the social perceiver would be
left with a near endless array of conscious categorizations of their
social world. The multiple perceptions would overwhelm the perceiver. To account for this, our hypothesis is that the two hemispheres work in parallel. On encountering a social stimulus, both
processes are initiated. Depending on how the social stimuli match
stored memory (Smith & Zárate, 1992), recently primed events
(Bargh & Ferguson, 2000), perceiver goals (Wheeler & Fiske,
2005), the targets’ characteristics, and other factors, either hemisphere can produce the first conscious representation. Once an
output is produced, it works to inhibit alternative outputs. This
inhibitory mechanism accounts for a number of person and group
distinctions. For example, outgroup members are categorized
faster by ethnicity (Stroessner, 1996) but are also more poorly
recognized than ingroup members (Malpass, 1974). In this instance, efficient group identification processes inhibit individuation. Similarly, new hypotheses are drawn below regarding how
familiarity should influence group and person encoding mechanisms. Thus, given the complexity of social perception, it is
proposed that the various mechanisms work to inhibit alternative
outputs to reduce perceptual overload.

Experimental Overview and Predictions
The preceding analyses provide predictions regarding how developing person-based representations can influence subsequent
group-based perceptions. In the present study, participants first
learned about eight persons: four same-race targets and four otherrace targets. All targets were men; participants were men and
women. To promote person-based memories of the targets, participants learned individuating nonstereotypic information about the
targets. This training included school major, interests, and the like.
This training reflects the types of social acquaintance learning one
is often confronted with in real-world interactions. After the training, participants were given a group categorization task. During
the categorization task, participants were asked to make race and
gender categorizations of new targets and of the targets used in the
previous training (trained targets). It was predicted that the recent
and therefore very salient person-based training would interfere
with making group-based categorizations, particularly if making
person-based representations is not the default process.
The individuating experiences at learning were expected to
produce different effects across the cerebral hemispheres in the
social categorization task. The model predicts that the temporally

111

salient person-based representations would work to inhibit the
categorization processes normally favored by the left hemisphere
(Zárate et al., 2000). That is, the person-based training was hypothesized to produce relatively strong individuated representations that should interfere with the left hemisphere processes. This
will be reflected in slower response times (RTs) to categorize the
trained targets by race or gender when presented to the left hemisphere compared with the right. Thus, the model predicts that for
the trained targets, RTs will be slower in the left hemisphere than
in the right despite the fact that the left hemisphere is generally
responsible for categorization processes. This should be especially
true for responses to targets whose race and gender are not those
of the participant (compared with when targets are of the same race
and gender of participants) when race and gender are more salient.
The right hemisphere is biased toward producing person-based
representations. Because the training task is consistent with default
person-based processing of the right hemisphere, the training
should influence subsequent categorization tendencies. This is
particularly true in this situation, where the stimuli were specifically designed to be nonstereotypic. Thus, it was further hypothesized that the person-based training should not interfere with the
person-based processing normally favored by the right hemisphere.
In summary, the model predicts that the person-based training
would produce different effects as a function of group membership
and cerebral hemisphere. Person-based information about others
was expected to inhibit group categorizations in the left hemisphere relative to the right hemisphere for targets of another race
or gender than the participant and more so for other race and
gender targets. Person-based information was not expected to
greatly influence perceptions when the targets are of the same race
and gender as participants (e.g., Latino men). The person-based
representation is posited to compete with the group-based representations, thereby slowing down responses to targets of a different
race or gender than the participant. The person-based training was
also hypothesized to have little effect for same-race, same-gender
targets because people normally process information about ingroup members in an individuated way (Park & Rothbart, 1982).
Thus, although experience generally improves performance, in this
instance, it was predicted to inhibit performance because it does
not match the default processing style favored by the left hemisphere.

Method
Participants
Sixty-seven Latinos participated for partial course credit in an
introduction to psychology course. Four participants were removed
from analyses because they reported being left handed. Of the
remaining participants, 36 were women and 27 were men.

Stimuli
This study consisted of a training phase and an experimental
phase. The training phase involved participants learning about four
African American males (an outgroup for the participants) and
four Latino male targets (an ingroup for the participants). Targets
were presented individually as a frontal head-and-shoulder, color

ZÁRATE, STOEVER, MACLIN, AND ARMS-CHAVEZ

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

112

photo. Photos were 7 cm high and 6 cm wide. Each photo was
presented with individuating information. The information included names, pictures, and a short, nonstereotypic profile (e.g.,
“David is the youngest of four. He is currently enrolled at the
university. He enjoys going to the movies”). Each target was
presented twice during the training phase. In the first presentation,
the participants viewed each target and his information for 1.5 min.
In the second presentation, participants viewed each target for 30 s.
Participants were instructed to form impressions of the targets;
become familiar with the pictures, names, and personal information; and review this information as many times as possible in the
time given. Stimuli were presented using PowerPoint to control the
speed of presentation.
In the test phase, participants were presented with a series of
photos for a categorization task. Each trial consisted of a fixation
point, a photo, and a group label, in that order. Participants were
first presented with an X in 24-point font for 500 ms. The X was
followed by a photo of an individual presented to either the left or
the right visual field for 180 ms. The 180-ms presentation rate was
used so that the items were gone before the participants could
move their eyes to see the items directly. The photo was immediately followed by one of four possible group labels presented
centrally in 24-point font. The group labels were Latino, Black,
man, and woman. Words were presented for 1,500 ms or until the
participant responded through a keypress. The longest a trial could
last was 2,180 ms, but the length of each trial was dependent on the
speed of the participant on the task. Participants were instructed to
hit the N key if the word and picture matched and to hit the C key
if the picture and the word did not match. Keys were covered with
labels to represent yes and no, respectively.
Test phase photos were the same size and type as in the training
phase. Target photographs were presented so that the center of
each photo was 6.5 cm to the left or right of a central fixation
point. Included in the photoset were 48 faces: 12 Latino women,
12 Latino men (including the 4 trained), 12 African American
women, and 12 African American men (including the 4 trained).
Each picture was displayed eight times, twice with each word and
in each visual field, for a total of 384 trials. Of these 384 trials, 192
trials presenting female targets were filler trials. Two experimental
sets were produced with each target face used as a trained face and
as a new face. Four other African American male targets and 4
Latino male targets were always new faces across all participants.
Analyses are reported only if they replicated across stimulus sets.
Further, as a control, all comparisons revolved around the same

new 4 targets for each group. Participants were given a short break
after 192 trials, creating two blocks. Equal numbers of trained and
new targets and African American and Latino targets were presented within each block, counterbalanced for hemifield and question.

Procedure
Participants were placed 60 cm from the computer screen and on
a chin rest to ensure equal distance from the computer screen and
floor for all participants and throughout all trials. We instructed
participants to stare at the X to ensure participants’ focus was on
the central fixation point at the beginning of each trial. Participants
completed a practice set of 10 trials before the test phase. Participants were instructed to be as accurate and as fast as possible. RTs
were recorded from the point the word appeared to the time a
participant hit a key on the keyboard. Stimuli presentation and data
recording were conducted via SuperLab (Cedrus Corporation,
2002).

Results
RTs below 200 ms were deleted from analyses. Consistent with
previous studies (Zárate et al., 2000), only correct RTs between
200 ms and 1,500 ms were analyzed. Incorrect responses totaled
12% of the total responses. The aggregate means were evaluated
for normality, and all response means fell within acceptable limits,
so no transformations were needed (Ratcliff, 1993).
The data were first analyzed within a 2 (question type: race or
gender) ⫻ 2 (target race: Latino or African American) ⫻ 2 (visual
field: left visual field–right hemisphere or right visual field–left
hemisphere) ⫻ 2 (target type: trained or new) ⫻ 2 (participant
gender) analysis of variance. Target type, target race, question
type, and visual field were treated as within-subject factors. The
question type factor did not influence the results; thus, means were
aggregated across that factor for further analyses. The ensuing
analysis produced a Target Race ⫻ Visual Field ⫻ Target Type ⫻
Participant Gender four-way interaction, F(1, 61) ⫽ 6.41, p ⫽
.014. See Table 1 for the means for each condition. Because the
primary interest was in hemispheric asymmetries for outgroup and
ingroup targets, that four-way interaction was decomposed by
analyzing trained and new targets separately to identify differences
across the hemispheres. This also eliminates any possible main

Table 1
Mean Response Times (in Milliseconds) to African American and Latino Targets Separately for Trained and New Targets
Trained
Left hemisphere

New
Right hemisphere

Left hemisphere

Right hemisphere

Target type

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

M

SD

African American targets
Female participants
Male participants
Latino targets
Female participants
Male participants

838
872
792
860
903
800

128
113
134
130
127
111

815
856
761
838
867
800

117
115
96
117
107
121

828
870
771
857
888
815

123
103
127
126
102
144

815
830
793
846
875
807

118
107
130
108
95
114

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

FACE PERCEPTION

effects due to experience that produce an overall facilitation or
inhibition independent of any hemispheric asymmetry.
This test included trained Latino and African American targets
as repeated measures in the same analysis and produced only a
significant visual field effect, F(1, 61) ⫽ 4.18, p ⫽ .045, without
any gender effect. As predicted, responses were significantly
slower to trained items when they were presented to the left
hemisphere than when they were presented to the right hemisphere. Although the analysis for trained items did not produce a
significant Target Race ⫻ Visual Field ⫻ Participant Gender
interaction, F(1, 61) ⫽ 2.37, p ⫽ .13, further analyses explored for
potential moderators across same-race targets versus other-race
targets and for gender differences across those comparisons. Specifically, we conducted planned comparisons that examined the
visual field effect for African American and Latino targets separately. As predicted, for trained African American targets, responses were slower in the left hemisphere condition than in the
right hemisphere condition (see Table 1), F(1, 61) ⫽ 4.34, p ⫽
.0413. Participant gender did not influence that interaction, F(1,
61) ⫽ .44, ns. That same analyses for the Latino targets, however,
produced only a participant gender main effect, F(1, 61) ⫽ 10.96,
p ⫽ .0016, without any differences across hemispheres, F(1, 61) ⫽
1.54, p ⫽ .22. Further comparisons conducted separately for
women and men, however, revealed that although women responded marginally faster to the targets first processed in the right
hemisphere, F(1, 35) ⫽ 3.03, p ⫽ .09, responses for the male
participants did not differ across conditions F(1, 26) ⫽ 0, ns. This
pattern of findings supports our hypotheses.
A similar analysis of the new targets produced a three-way
interaction that included target race, visual field, and participant
gender, F(1, 61) ⫽ 4.12, p ⫽ .04. Further analyses for each race
analyzed separately revealed a significant Gender ⫻ Hemifield
interaction for the African American targets, F(1, 61) ⫽ 11.24,
p ⫽ .001, and no effect for the Latino targets (all ps ⬎ .3). For the
African American targets, female participants responded faster to
targets first processed in the right hemisphere versus the left
hemisphere, F(1, 35) ⫽ 12.72, p ⫽ .001. Male participants, however, responded similarly to targets across the hemispheres, F(1,
26) ⫽ 2.08, p ⫽ .16. Those means are also reported in Table 1. The
overall pattern was different for new targets than for trained targets
and further supports the general hypotheses.

Discussion
These data show that group judgments about known individuals
are slower in the left cerebral hemisphere than in the right cerebral
hemisphere for targets that differ in group membership on at least
one fundamental social category of race or gender. Personalizing
experiences, even minimal experiences, inhibit group perception
processes for outgroup members. These results show that social
perception processes differ across the hemispheres as a function of
prior learning experiences. Learning about Joe inhibits participants
from categorizing Joe as “Black.” It is important to note that the
inhibition occurs in the left hemisphere, as predicted. The left
hemisphere is the hemisphere more responsible for stereotyping
(Zárate et al., 2000). This supports the hypothesis that personalizing information works to interfere with the activation or completion of social categorization processes, particularly when the targets differ from the perceiver on important social dimensions. A

113

basic tenet of modern social cognitive theory is that social categorization mediates the application of the associated stereotypes
(Dovidio et al., 1986; Fazio & Dunton, 1997; Zárate & Smith,
1990). With inhibited social categorization speeds, one can infer
inhibited stereotyping. These results show why intergroup contact
often fails to reduce the stereotypes associated with those outgroup
members: The stereotype is simply not activated.
Here, the inhibition occurred with a minimum of familiarity.
This is both conceptually and methodologically important. Conceptually, intergroup contact is far more involved than the simple
manipulations used here. Presumably, more extensive contact
might produce either stronger effects or qualitatively different
effects. Extended contact might drive two distinct effects. On the
one hand, more contact will provide more personalizing experiences, thereby strengthening the manipulations. This would facilitate right hemisphere perceptual processes and further inhibit
social categorization processes. Extended contact also generally
occurs over multiple days and often years, allowing time for
memory consolidation processes to further strengthen the original
encoding processes (Abel et al., 1995; Chavez, 2006). A more
conscious awareness of the individual may dramatically alter the
associated processes. Thus, learning counterstereotypic or irrelevant information about a person can interfere with accessing the
associated stereotypes and, over time, that interference should get
stronger.
The fact that the effects are evident for African American targets
but show perceiver gender differences, albeit marginal ones, for
the Latino targets suggests important social psychological moderators to any neurological model. A social feature is not perceived
in a vacuum. In this instance, race receives added attention for
other race targets. Similarly, the fact that Latino male participants
made no distinctions between new and trained Latino male targets
suggests that when targets are the same on all of the relevant
dimensions, people generally make individuating inferences about
others. Because the stimuli were male faces, however, one must
interpret any participant gender effects with caution.
Methodologically, these results suggest that many reported findings of automatic stereotyping might be limited to those situations
in which the perceiver has no prior knowledge of the targets. In
related research, Kawakami, Dovidio, Moll, Hermsen, and Russin
(2000) showed that practice in negating the use of stereotypes
reduced later stereotype activation. In our study, participants were
asked to make more personal inferences about the targets, which
also produced reduced group categorization effects. Thus, although it is well accepted that people automatically stereotype
others, our results suggest that those effects might be due to the
fact most researchers use entirely new person targets. If all participants know about a target is his or her race, maybe it is only
logical that they stereotype the targets.
One can easily extend this model to test how actual contact and
prolonged contact influence social perception. For instance, in the
current experiments, the personalizing information was nonstereotypic. What does the research on the contact hypothesis suggest if
the contact partially supports the stereotype? If the learning experience provides constant cues of the group membership to make
the targets appear representative of the group, the person should be
encoded as a group member. With that encoding, one should find
facilitated rather than inhibited categorical processing. Categoryconsistent processing should be evident in the left hemisphere and

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

114

ZÁRATE, STOEVER, MACLIN, AND ARMS-CHAVEZ

for centrally presented targets. Similarly, one can identify other
moderators of the contact hypothesis to test the underlying neurocognitive components. Through a broader investigation of the
contact hypothesis, one can identify the underlying components to
understand better the associated processes.
The presented research also addresses the primacy of person and
group perception processes. Traditionally, some of the dominant
models of social perception have posited a serial process. Features
such as race, gender, and possibly age are perceived first (Fiske &
Neuberg, 1990). If the perceiver is properly motivated or if the
initial perception is inadequate, the perceiver proceeds to attend to
and encode individuating features. Thus, “category-based processes have priority over attribute-oriented processes” (Fiske &
Neuberg, 1990, p. 2). Within that model, attribute-oriented responses entail individuating responses. Despite the intuitive appeal
of the model, multiple lines of research suggest that person perception may occur before group perception or, at the very least,
occur at the same time. Indeed, Brewer (1988) suggested that
person perception consists of dual processes, including category
and person-based processing. The model presented here supports
that type of distinction.
Further evidence against the hypothesis that social perception
starts with categorizations and moves to person-based inferences
comes from a study completed by Sanders (1999, Study 2). In
Sanders’s study, participants were presented with a series of paired
prime–target photos. The prime was always presented centrally,
and the target photo was presented to either hemifield. Two different judgment tasks were used. At times, participants were asked
to make same-person judgments. Was the target the same person as
the prime? At other times, participants were asked to make samegender judgments. Was the target person the same gender as the
prime? The main finding of interest was a Task ⫻ Hemisphere
interaction. Participants were faster to respond to the same-person
task when the targets were presented directly to the right hemisphere. In contrast, same gender judgments were faster in the left
hemisphere than in the right (when the target was the same
person). In addition, overall, same-person judgments were made
marginally faster than were same-gender judgments. Those data
provide further evidence that the person-based judgments are not
only independent of group categorization processes but may also
be faster.
These data further support our model that social perception
entails two distinct neurologically based perceptual systems. One
system, which identifies combinations of features, works to develop exemplar-based memories of individuals. The other system,
which identifies specific features, works to develop group-based
representations. Through those representations, the associated information becomes accessible. Consistent with models that posit
dual memory systems (cf. Brewer, 1988; Knowlton & Squire,
1993), experience with a target had dissociated effects on later
categorical processing.
The original goal of the model was to address social perception
issues, although these findings are relevant for a number of research topics. How do the hemispheres respond to well-practiced
but orthogonal judgments? Social perception is very well practiced, which provides a unique opportunity to investigate how
various orthogonal automatic processes compete for consciousness. One can also contrast less practiced but more salient judgments (per experimental manipulations) with more automatic judg-

ments to test how explicit and implicit processes work. If the
hemispheres are biased toward processing particular types of information, one can further distinguish person from group perception. We hope that these approaches can shed light on intergroup
perceptions and other basic social psychological processes.

References
Abel, T., Alberini, C., Ghiradi, M., Huang, Y., Nguyen, P., & Kandel, E. R.
(1995). Steps toward a molecular definition of memory consolidation. In
D. Schacter (Ed), Memory distortions: How minds, brains, and societies
reconstruct the past (pp. 298 –325). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bargh, J. A., & Ferguson, M. J. (2000). Beyond behaviorism: On the
automaticity of higher mental processes. Psychological Bulletin, 126,
925–945.
Brewer, M. B. (1988). A dual process model of impression formation. In
R. S. Wyer & T. K. Srull (Eds.), Advances in social cognition (Vol. 1,
pp. 1–36). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bruce, V., & Humphreys, G. W. (1994). Recognizing objects and faces.
Journal of Visual Cognition, 1, 141–180.
Cabeza, R., & Kato, T. (2000). Features are also important: Contributions
of featural and configural processing to face recognition. Psychological
Science, 11, 429 – 433.
Cabeza, R., & Nyberg, L. (2000). Imaging cognition: II. An empirical
review of 275 PET and fMRI studies. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 1– 47.
Cedrus Corporation. (2002). SuperLab Pro (Version 2.0) [Computer software]. San Pedro, CA: Author.
Chavez, C. J. (2006). Do they see me as a person or just my stereotypes?
The effects of abstract and specific visual-form on stereotyping. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Texas at El Paso.
Cohen, J. D., & Tong, F. (2001, September 28). The face of controversy.
Science, 293, 2405–2407.
De Renzi, E., Perani, D., Cartesimo, G. A., Silveri, M. C., & Fazio, F.
(1994). Prosopagnosia can be associated with damage confined to the
right hemisphere: An MRI and PET study and a review of the literature.
Neuropsychologia, 32, 893–902.
Diamond, R., & Carey, S. (1986). Why faces are not special: An effect of
expertise? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 107–117.
Dovidio, J. F., Evans, N., & Tyler, R. B. (1986). Racial stereotypes: The
content of their cognitive representations. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 22, 22–37.
Farah, M. J., Wilson, K. D., Drain, M., & Tanaka, J. N. (1998). What is
“special” about face perception. Psychological Review, 105, 482– 498.
Fazio, R. H., & Dunton, B. C. (1997). Categorization by race: The impact
of automatic and controlled components of racial prejudice. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 33, 451– 470.
Fiske, S. T., & Neuberg, S. L. (1990). A continuum of impression formation, from category-based to individuating processes: Influences of information and motivation on attention and interpretation. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 23, 1–74.
Golby, A. J., Gabrieli, J. D., Chiao, J. Y., & Eberhardt, J. L. (2001).
Differential responses in the fusiform region to same-race and other-race
faces. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 845– 850.
Hamilton, D. L., & Sherman, S. J. (1996). Perceiving persons and groups.
Psychological Review, 103, 336 –355.
Hamilton, D. L., Sherman, S. J., & Maddox, K. B. (1999). Dualities and
continua: Implications for understanding perceptions of persons and
groups. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope, (Eds.), Dual-process theories in
social psychology (pp. 606 – 626). New York: Guilford Press.
Haxby, J. V., Gobbini, M. I., Furey, M. L., Ishai, A., Schouten, J. L., &
Pietrini, P. (2001, September 28). Distributed and overlapping represen-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

FACE PERCEPTION
tations of faces and objects in ventral temporal cortex. Science, 293,
2425–2430.
Hillger, L. A., & Koenig, O. (1991). Separable mechanisms in face
processing: Evidence from hemispheric specialization. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 3, 42–58.
Hiscock, M., Perachio, N., & Inch, R. (2001). Is there a sex difference in
human laterality? IV. An exhaustive survey of dual-task interference
studies from six neuropsychology journals. Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology, 23, 137–148.
Ito, T. A., Thompson, E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2004). Tracking the timecourse of social perception: The effects of racial cues on event-related
potentials. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1267–1280.
Ito, T. A., & Urland, G. R. (2003). Race and gender on the brain:
Electrocortical measures of attention to the race and gender of multiply
categorizable individuals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
85, 616 – 626.
Ito, T. A., & Urland, G. R. (2005). The influence of processing objectives
on the perception of faces: An ERP study of race and gender perception.
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 5, 21–36.
Jordan, T. R., & Patching, G. R. (2003). Perceptual interactions between
bilaterally presented words: What you get is often not what you see.
Neuropsychology, 17, 566 –577.
Kawakami, K., Dovidio, J. F., Moll, J., Hermsen, S., & Russin, A. (2000).
Just say no (to stereotyping): Effects of training in the negation of
stereotypic associations on stereotype activation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78, 871– 888.
Kilgore, W. D. S., & Yurgelun-Todd, D. A. (2001). Sex differences in
amygdala activation during the perception of facial affect. NeuroReport,
12, 2543–2547.
Knowlton, B. J., & Squire, L. R. (1993, December 10). The learning of
categories: Parallel brain systems for item memory and category knowledge. Science, 262, 1747–1749.
Kruglanski, A. W., Chun, W. T., Erb, H. P., Pierro, A., Mannetti, L., &
Spiegel, S. (2003). A parametric unimodel of human judgment: Integrating dual-process frameworks in social cognition from a single-model
perspective. In J. P. Forgas, K. D. Williams, & W. von Hippel (Eds.),
Social judgments: Implicit and explicit processes (pp. 137–161). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Lepore, L., & Brown, R. (1997). Category and stereotype activation: Is
prejudice inevitable? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72,
275–287.
Levin, D. T. (1996). Classifying faces by race: The structure of race
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 22, 1364 –1382.
Lui, J., Harris, A., & Kanwisher, N. (2002). Stages of processing in face
perception: An MEG study. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 910 –916.
Malpass, R. S. (1974). Racial bias in eyewitness identification? Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1, 42– 44.
Marsolek, C. J. (1999). Dissociable neural subsystems underlie abstract
and specific object recognition. Psychological Science, 10, 111–118.
McCarthy, G., Puce, A., Gore, J. C., & Allison, T. (1997). Face-specific
processing in the human fusiform gyrus. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 605– 610.
Medin, D. L., & Smith, E. E. (1981). Strategies and classification learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 7,
241–253.
Moscovitch, M., Winocur, G., & Behrmann, M. (1997). What is special
about face recognition? Nineteen experiments on a person with visual

115

object agnosia and dyslexia but normal face recognition. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 5, 555– 604.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of global features in
visual perception. Cognitive Psychology, 9, 353–383.
Olk, B., & Hartje, W. (2001). The bilateral effect: Callosal inhibition or
intrahemispheric competition. Brain and Cognition, 45, 317–324.
Park, B., & Rothbart, M. (1982). Perception of out-group homogeneity and
levels of social categorization: Memory for the subordinate attributes of
in-group and out-group members. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 42, 1051–1068.
Parr, L A., Dove, T., & Hopkins, W. D. (1998). Why faces may be special:
Evidence of the inversion effect in chimpanzees. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 10, 615– 622.
Ratcliff, R. (1993). Methods for dealing with reaction time outliers. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 510 –532.
Roalf, D., Lowery, N., & Turetsky, B. I. (2006). Behavioral and physiological findings of gender differences in global–local visual processing.
Brain and Cognition, 60, 32– 42.
Rutherford, B. J., & Lutz, K. T. (2004). Conflicting strategies and hemispheric suppression in a lexical decision task. Brain and Cognition, 55,
387–391.
Sanders, J. D. (1999). Cerebral hemispheric asymmetries in visual processing: How visual processing strategies influence person perception.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Texas at El Paso.
Sanders, J. D., McClure, K. A., & Zárate, M. A. (2004). Cerebral hemispheric asymmetries in social perception: Perceiving and responding to
the individual and the group. Social Cognition, 22, 279 –291.
Smith, E. R., & Zárate, M. A. (1992). Exemplar-based model of social
judgment. Psychological Review, 99, 3–21.
Stroessner, S. J. (1996). Social categorization by race or sex: Effects of
perceived non-normalcy on response times. Social Cognition, 14, 247–
276.
Valentine, T. (1988). Upside-down faces: A review of the effects of
inversion upon face recognition. British Journal of Psychology, 79,
471– 491.
Weissman, D. H., & Banich, M. T. (1999). Global–local inference modulated by communication between the hemispheres. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 282–308.
Wheeler, M. E., & Fiske, S. T. (2005). Controlling racial prejudice:
Social– cognitive goals affect amygdale and stereotype activation. Psychological Science, 16, 56 – 63.
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology Monograph Supplement, 9(2, Pt. 2),
1–27.
Zárate, M. A., & Sanders, J. D. (1999). Face categorization, graded
priming, and the mediating influences of similarity. Social Cognition,
17, 367–389.
Zárate, M. A., & Sanders, J. D. (2004). Cerebral hemispheric asymmetries
in group learning and social perception. Current Psychology of Cognition, 22(4 –5), 384 – 405.
Zárate, M. A., Sanders, J. D., & Garza, A. A. (2000). Neurological
disassociations of social perception processes. Social Cognition, 18,
223–251.
Zárate, M. A., & Smith, E. R. (1990). Person categorization and stereotyping. Social Cognition, 8, 161–185.

Received May 25, 2006
Revision received May 15, 2007
Accepted May 17, 2007 䡲

