Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

RUNNING HEAD: Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Nuestra Culpa: collective guilt and shame as predictors of reparation for historical
wrongdoing

Rupert Brown, Roberto González, Hanna Zagefka, Jorge Manzi & Sabina Čehajić

Key words: collective guilt, collective shame, reparation

:

1

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Abstract

Three studies examined the hypothesis that collective guilt and shame have different
consequences for reparation. In two longitudinal studies, respondents were Non-Indigenous
Chileans (Study 1: N = 124/120, lag 8 weeks; Study 2: N = 247/137, lag 6 months) and the
outgroup was Chile‟s largest indigenous group, The Mapuche. In both studies, it was found
that collective guilt predicted reparation attitudes longitudinally. Collective shame had only
cross-sectional associations with reparation and no direct longitudinal effects. In Study 2, it
moderated the longitudinal effects of collective guilt such that the effects of guilt were
stronger for low shame respondents. In Study 3 (N = 193 Non-Indigenous Chileans), the
cross-sectional relationships between guilt, shame and reparation attitudes were replicated.
The relationship between shame and reparation attitudes was mediated by a desire to
improve the ingroup‟s reputation.

2

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Nuestra culpa: collective guilt and shame as predictors of reparation for historical
wrongdoing

Historians of the second half of the twentieth century will doubtless come to record
that it was marked by several violent intergroup conflicts around the globe. The wars in
South East Asia, the long struggle against Apartheid in South Africa, the genocides in
Rwanda and former Yugoslavia and the continuing struggles of indigenous peoples around
the world for the restitution of their homelands and the preservation of their cultures are
just a few of the many social conflicts that have cost millions of lives over the past fifty
years. Whilst such a record of bloodshed is regrettably hardly a novel phenomenon, one
feature of at least some of these conflicts is new and is attracting increasing attention from
the social scientific community. That new aspect is the emergence of political debate about
people‟s felt culpability for injustices perpetrated by their group in those conflicts in the
past, and the extent to which some restitution should be made to the victims of those
injustices in the form of public apologies, memorials or material reparations (Barkan, 2000;
Buruma, 1994; Steele, 1990). That debate has stimulated theorizing and research in social
psychology into the phenomenon of self-conscious emotions and their consequences for
intergroup relations (Branscombe & Doosje, 2004; Leach, Snider & Iyer, 2002). In this
paper we seek to make a contribution to this developing research area by examining the
effects of experienced collective ingroup guilt and shame on the desire to make reparation
to a “victim” outgroup. We do this in the naturalistic context of relations between the nonIndigenous majority and one of the Indigenous minority groups in Chile.

3

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Reactions to wrongdoing: the distinction between guilt and shame
In the domain of interpersonal relations there has been much research into
individuals‟ emotional reactions to the realization that they have done something in
contravention of some relevant personal or normative standards (Tangney & Fischer,
1995). An important point of departure for this work was Lewis‟ (1971) distinction
between the self-conscious emotions of guilt and shame. For Lewis, both of these reactions
involve negative affect but the focus of the experience differs: in guilt the main emphasis is
on the wrong-doing and its consequences for the other (“I did this bad thing to X, who
suffered as a result”), whilst shame is marked more by a focus on the negative implications
of that wrongdoing for one‟s self-concept (“I did this bad thing to X, and therefore I am
(seen to be) a bad person”). Since both emotions are somewhat aversive, people are
motivated to alleviate them. Lewis (1971) speculated that this alleviation would take
different forms. Guilt, with its focus on the misdeed should be more likely to lead to some
form of restitution to the victim (e.g., apology, reparation); shame, on the other hand, with
its focus on the self, should lead to withdrawal from or avoidance of the situation that gave
rise to it.
These ideas provoked considerable empirical research into the role of guilt and
shame in interpersonal relations (e.g., Baumeister, Stillwell & Heatherton, 1994; Tangney
& Fischer, 1995). Early on, it was recognized that lay usage of the words “guilt” and
“shame” often treats them as synonyms (Shaver, Schwartz, Kirkson & O‟Connor, 1987).
Nevertheless, even if they are interchangeable in ordinary language use, there is growing
consensus that, whilst positively correlated, the two emotions have a different underlying
psychology and may sometimes lead to different outcomes. Shame generally seems to be a
more intensely and aversively experienced emotion, associated with anger, wishing to hide

4

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

and self-oriented counter-factuals, while guilt has been observed to correlate more with
empathy and action-oriented counterfactuals (Niedenthal, Tangney & Gavanski, 1994;
Tangney, 1991; Tangney, Miller, Flicker and Barlow, 1996; Tangney, Wagner, Fletcher, &
Gramzow, 1992). Notably, though, in view of Lewis‟ (1971) prediction, there is not always
a greater tendency to repair associated with guilt than with shame (Roseman, West &
Schwartz, 1994; Tangney et al., 1996).
One debated issue has been how to conceptualize shame. Some have followed
Lewis‟ (1971) lead in regarding shame as the emotion that follows from a negative selfperception, the sense that one‟s character is flawed in some respect (e.g., Tangney, 1991).
Others, though, link shame more to the damage to one‟s reputation that may be caused by
the public exposure of one‟s misdeeds (Smith, Webster, Parrott & Eyre, 2002). Although
these are subtly different conceptualizations of shame, it is likely that the two components
are often closely intertwined. As Mead (1934) noted many years ago, one‟s reputation in
the eyes of others is a major determinant of one‟s self-concept. However, while both
accounts predict that shame should still lead to avoidance, it is possible to imagine
circumstances in which a temporary coping strategy for dealing with the „reputational‟
aspect of shame could be to make some kind of public form of restitution if, in so doing,
one‟s public image could thereby be enhanced. Later in this paper, we will explore this idea
empirically.
One other issue concerns the possibility of whether both guilt and shame can be
experienced simultaneously, and whether they may interact. Lewis (1971, p. 42) suggested
that both emotions can be felt at the same time and others have concurred with this
(Tangney, 1991; Tangney et al., 1992). Tangney et al. (1992) also introduced the concept
of “shame-free guilt” and “guilt-free shame”, the idea that some individuals may be prone
to experience guilt but little shame, or vice versa. Tangney et al. (1992) investigated this

5

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

using partial correlations among their personality measures of guilt and shame (e.g., guiltproneness controlling for shame-proneness); an alternative approach could have been to
explore whether they interact. In other words, does guilt have stronger associations with
reparative tendencies for those who show little shame? If shame has generally avoidance
consequences on social relations, it seems plausible to suppose that at high levels it might
thereby „inhibit‟ the predicted prosocial consequences of guilt, thus suppressing the
positive link between guilt and reparation. We will return to this issue later.
In summary, then, there is some evidence that when people perceive themselves to
have behaved illegitimately, they can experience guilt or shame (or both) and that,
depending on which predominates, rather different outcomes can occur. Although the
evidence is not unequivocal, guilt seems to be more closely connected to prosocial
orientations, shame to stronger negative self-evaluations, reputational concerns and various
kinds of avoidance behaviour.
Collective guilt and collective shame: conceptual issues
The discussion above was concerned with the reactions of individuals to the
knowledge that they themselves have transgressed in some way, usually towards another
individual. However, emotions are not restricted to such interpersonal situations. They can
also be felt in response to other people‟s misdeeds, particularly if there is some
psychological connection with those others, for example if they belong to the same group
(Smith, 1993). Furthermore, the victims of those misdeeds may be whole categories of
people and not just isolated individuals. In short, guilt and shame can have a collective
component.
The first social psychological study of collective guilt was by Doosje, Branscombe,
Spears and Manstead (1998). Drawing on social identity and self categorization theories
(Tajfel & Turner, 1986; Turner, Hogg, Oakes, Reicher & Wetherell, 1987), they proposed

6

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

that, since group memberships and their associated category attributes can become
internalized into an individual‟s self-concept, it was plausible to assume that the actions of
other ingroup members would have affective implications for that individual. Just as the
glorious exploits of some members of our ingroup can lead to others of us to bask in
reflected glory (Cialdini et al., 1976), so too might the immoral actions of other ingroup
members generate feelings in us of “vicarious” remorse or regret (Lickel, Schmader, Curtis,
Scarnier & Ames, 2005) – cringing in shared blame, as it were.
Subsequent theorizing has sought to explicate these self-conscious collective
emotions. Following Weiner (1995), Leach et al. (2002) and Branscombe, Slugoski and
Kappen (2004) argue that collective guilt arises mainly when group members perceive that
they have some responsibility for their ingroup‟s misdeeds or the subsequent repercussions
of those misdeeds. In common with the work reviewed in the previous section, most
commentators agree that collective guilt should lead ingroup members to want to make
reparation to the outgroup (Branscombe et al., 2004; Lickel, Schmader & Barquissau,
2004).
In contrast, collective shame is thought more likely to be invoked when people do
not feel in control of their (ingroup‟s) actions and when the ingroup is exposed as being
weak or incompetent (Branscombe et al., 2004; Lickel et al., 2004). Conceptualizations of
collective shame contain the same duality that we noted in discussing individual shame. So,
Branscombe et al. (2004) emphasise the reputational aspect: “collective shame involves
being publicly exposed as incompetent, not being in control, weak and potentially even
disgusting in the eyes of others” (p.29, emphasis in the original). Lickel et al. (2004) add
the idea of shame being associated with some negative ingroup “essence” (Haslam,
Rothschild & Ernst, 2000; Yzerbyt, Rocher & Schadron, 1997): “collective shame stems
from perceiving that the actions of the ingroup confirm or reveal a flawed aspect of one‟s

7

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

social identity….(and) ….implicate something about the very nature of who they are” (pp.
42-43). As in the case of individual emotions, it seems likely that the negative essence and
the reputational components of shame will often elide into each other. Moreover, both
viewpoints predict that collective shame, because of the implied threat to the ingroup‟s
image, should lead to avoidance of the events that gave rise to the feelings in the first place,
or even to hostility towards the outgroup. In sum, there is some consensus that the primary
antecedent of action tendencies towards reparation should be collective guilt, rather than
collective shame.
We do not dissent from this hypothesis, especially as it concerns durable
consequences of these two dysphoric emotions. However, we believe that in the short term
both collective guilt and shame can have rather similar and positive associations with
reparation attitudes. One reason for this lies in the “reputational” aspect of shame. Insofar
as ingroup members can see an immediate possibility for improving their group‟s image in
the eyes of others, then an expedient strategy for alleviating shame could also be to be seen
to endorsing restitutive policies. Over time, though, we suspect that there are more likely to
be more opportunities to „deny‟ feelings and cognitions about the shame-inducing situation,
with a consequent reduction in tendencies to repair.
What has also not been investigated hitherto, either theoretically or empirically, is
whether the emotions of collective guilt and shame might interact. As noted earlier, it is
plausible to suppose that group members could feel both emotions simultaneously –
certainly, they are usually correlated positively in the interpersonal domain (Shaver et al.,
1987; Tangney, 1991). If so, what might be the consequences of feeling guilt with or
without shame? Given the above argument, it is possible to predict that a relatively high
level of shame, with its likely “avoidance” implications, might inhibit the “normal”
prosocial consequences of guilt. Thus, an optimal situation, at least from the perspective of

8

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

promoting positive intergroup outcomes, should be a combination of relatively high levels
of guilt coupled with relatively low levels of shame.
Collective guilt and collective shame: prior research
What empirical research has investigated collective guilt and shame? We focus first
on attempts to measure the two concepts. Then we discuss research that has examined the
consequences of collective guilt and shame for intergroup attitudes generally, and for a
desire to make restitution to the outgroup in particular.
One widely used measure of collective guilt was published by Branscombe et al.
(2004). This consists of five items, four of which refer to expressions of regret or guilt over
the ingroup‟s negative actions towards other groups, and one of which refers to a desire to
make reparation for any damage caused (see also, Roccas, Klar & Liviatan, 2004).
Collective shame is not assessed by this measure. Although variants of this measures have
proved useful in several different intergroup contexts (e.g., Doosje et al., 1998; Pedersen,
Beven, Walker & Griffiths, 2004), we believe it is preferable not to include desire to make
reparation in the measure of guilt itself since this is hypothesised to be a consequence of
guilt rather than an integral component of it. It also precludes a study of the circumstances,
if any, under which shame might predict reparation. Swim and Miller (1999) kept separate
their collective guilt scale from their measure of reparation but, again, their scale did not
measure collective shame. One study, which did attempt to measure both emotions, was by
Lickel et al. (2005). Participants were asked to recall an event in which they felt guilty or
ashamed for the actions of someone else (e.g., family member, ethnic ingroup member) and
then to record the emotions that this event evoked. The emotion words “guilty”, “regret”
and “remorse” tended to load together on the same factor and distinctly from the words
“ashamed”, “embarrassed”, “disgraced” and “humiliated”. Iyer, Schmader and Lickel
(2007) used a similar technique. However, Iyer, Leach and Crosby (2003) found that

9

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

ratings of emotions felt when thinking about racial discrimination did not separate so
clearly into guilt and shame factors. Instead, emotions like “guilty”, “ashamed”, “regretful”
and “blameworthy” tended to load together into what Iyer et al. (2003) labelled a “guilt”
factor, whilst “sympathetic”, “compassionate” and “empathetic” loaded together into a
“sympathy” factor (see also, Leach, Iyer & Pederson, 2006).
Probably, this inconsistency across studies reflects the ambiguity in lay usage of the
terms guilt and shame and more theoretically grounded items are needed to distinguish the
two concepts. In any event, most existing measures have not attempted or been able clearly
to differentiate collective shame from collective guilt, and some measures of collective
guilt conflate guilt and reparation tendencies. In the studies presented in this paper, we
report on our efforts to develop distinct and reliable measures for collective guilt and
shame and then assess the unique ability of each to predict desire to make reparation to an
outgroup.
Leaving aside the question of measures used, research has consistently found
reliable associations between collective guilt and indicators of intergroup reparation.
Doosje et al. (1998, Study 2) presented Dutch student participants with brief historical
accounts of the Dutch colonial treatment of Indonesia. Despite the fact that this sample of
student participants could have had no direct involvement with their country‟s past
imperialist misadventures, they still reported moderate levels of guilt and desire to make
compensation, and these two measures were positively correlated.
Most other work in this domain has relied on cross-sectional correlational designs
and has investigated only collective guilt. Swim and Miller (1999) found that white guilt
consistently predicted reparation to African Americans in the form of favourable attitudes
towards affirmative action policies, and less prejudice towards African Americans. This
was confirmed by Iyer et al. (2003) who also found that guilt was only reliably associated

10

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

with what they called “compensatory” forms of affirmative action (e.g., special entrance
quotas to university, positive job discrimination), and not with equal opportunities policies
(e.g., increased efforts to attract more minority applicants to job openings). Elsewhere,
McGarty et al. (2005) found that collective guilt felt by Non-Indigenous Australians about
the treatment of Indigenous Australians was associated with support for official
government apologies to the Indigenous community.
To date, little work has attempted to disentangle the potentially divergent intergroup
consequences of collective guilt and collective shame. Harvey and Oswald (2000)
attempted to induce guilt and shame experimentally in White Americans. However, their
manipulation had similar effects on both emotions, and the latter showed similar
relationships to the main dependent measure, support for Black Programs. Lickel et al.
(2005) studied the vicarious emotions aroused by a recollection of the misdeeds of friends,
family members or ethnic groups. In line with Lickel at al.‟s (2004) model, whilst shame
and guilt were positively correlated with each other, the former emotion was correlated
with motives to distance themselves from the perpetrator or the situation, the latter was
correlated with motives to apologize and repair. More recently, however, Brown and
Čehajić (2006) report two cross-sectional studies in former Yugoslavia in which both
collective guilt and shame were positively related to reparation attitudes.
In some recent research set in the context of the current Iraq war, Iyer et al. (2007)
examined correlates of action intentions to compensate the Iraqi people for damage caused
by the invasion. They found that neither of their measures of general guilt or shame (about
the situation in Iraq) predicted compensatory attitudes once anger (about the same
situation) was controlled. In fact, in both studies Iyer et al. (2007) found the latter emotion
to be the most potent correlate of compensation intentions. Leach et al. (2006) also
examined the roles of guilt and anger in the context of political action in Australia over the

11

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

plight of Aboriginal people there. Although they found that collective guilt was associated
with compensation attitudes even when controlling for anger, anger proved a stronger
predictor of actual willingness to act to effect that compensation. In Study 3 we will
examine this possible role of anger in guilt and shame arousing contexts.
In summary, then, several studies have shown that collective guilt is associated with
tendencies to apologize and make restitution to the outgroup. With three exceptions
(Doosje et al., 1998; Harvey & Oswald, 2000; Iyer et al, 2003, Study 2), these have relied
on cross-sectional correlational data with all the usual interpretative difficulties about
causation that that implies. Little research has sought to investigate the consequences of
both collective guilt and collective shame in the same study. Such an omission is surprising
in view of the clearly divergent predictions about the effects of guilt and shame that have
been made. In the first two studies presented here, we looked to fill these lacunae by
conducting longitudinal research into the effects of collective guilt and collective shame on
reparation. By measuring both independent and dependent variables at two points in time,
some inferences of causality are possible (Bijleveld & Van der Kamp, 1998; Cook &
Campbell, 1979; Finkel, 1995). The research was set in the context of the relationship
between Indigenous and Non-Indigenous groups in Chile, a hitherto under-researched
locale in social psychology and one that is especially appropriate for studying the effects of
the particular group-based emotions with which we are concerned in this paper.
Chilean research context
Chile consists of a majority of Non-Indigenous Chileans (around 16 million) and
several Indigenous groups, of which the largest and culturally most significant is the
Mapuche (around 0.8 million). The Mapuche have fought against invasions of their
territory for over three centuries and were finally defeated only in the late 19th century.
Since then, the Mapuche have suffered further infringements of their land rights,

12

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

suppression of their culture (e.g. their language was outlawed under Pinochet‟s military
regime, 1973-1989), and from severe economic and social deprivation. Recently they have
become more active in protest about their conditions, sometimes culminating in violent
clashes with agents of the state or private employers. Non-Indigenous Chileans have rather
ambivalent feelings towards the Mapuche (Saiz, 2002). On the one hand, the Mapuche are
characterized – e.g. in school books – as brave and fearless warriors, a part of the „founding
myth‟ of the Chilean nation, and, as such, a source of pride for Non-Indigenous Chileans.
On the other hand, Mapuche unemployment and alcoholism rates are disproportionally
higher than for other groups in Chile, which makes them a ready target of negative attitudes
from the majority. Furthermore, in recent years there has been a public debate about NonIndigenous people‟s group-based culpability and responsibility for treatment of the
Mapuche in the past, and the possible need for reparations. This debate has been translated
into official state action, with the Chilean government establishing a body for the
improvement of the Mapuche‟s situation (Instituto Nacional de Estadística, 2002;
Ministerio de Planificación y Cooperación, 2003). Thus, issues of group-based guilt,
shame, responsibility and reparations are likely to be quite salient in Non-Indigenous
people‟s minds when thinking about the Mapuche.
Hypotheses
We are now in a position to develop our principal hypotheses. The first hypothesis
(H1) is that feelings of collective guilt held by Non-Indigenous Chileans over the historical
mistreatment of the Mapuche will be causally1 related to attitudes in favour of making
reparations to the Mapuche. This implies that prior feelings of guilt will longitudinally
predict reparation attitudes.
Turning now to the possible effects of collective shame: theoretically, as we have
seen, shame should be less strongly and less durably related to reparation. It is possible that

13

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

in the short-term there may be a positive association with reparation attitudes, but we
hypothesize that this will not translate into a longitudinal causal relationship because of its
essential ingroup-focus. Instead, as argued earlier, we believe that it could interact with
collective guilt to inhibit the latter‟s usual prosocial consequences. Thus, the second
hypothesis (H2) proposes a moderation of the guilt-reparation relationship by shame, such
that high shame respondents will show a weaker relationship between guilt and reparation
than low shame respondents.
Study 1
Method
Participants
One hundred and twenty-four Non-Indigenous secondary school students from the
Temuco region in Chile participated in the survey (55 male, 69 female. Mean age 15.47
years). For 120 of these participants, data were collected at two points in time with a time
lag of approximately 8 weeks.
Procedure and Measures
Data were collected in Temuco, a city several hundred kilometres to the south of
Santiago in an area in which the proportion of the Mapuche population is very large. All
participants filled out a questionnaire in Spanish during school class time, which contained
the measures of the independent and dependent variables as translated below. The
questionnaires distributed at both points in time were virtually identical. Participation was
voluntary and took place with parental and student written consent. At the conclusion of the
study all participants were debriefed.
Collective guilt and shame. Collective guilt was measured by asking participants
how much they agreed (or disagreed) with four statements concerning the Non-Indigenous
people‟s current or historical treatment of the Mapuche (see Table 1). Collective shame

14

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

was measured by inviting agreement (or disagreement) with three statements which
attributed the cause of the Non-Indigenous group‟s mistreatment of the Mapuche to some
internal factor (see Table 1). Preliminary factor analysis of these seven items (with the
principal axis method of extraction) with a larger (N = 359) but equivalent sample2 of NonIndigenous students at T1 confirmed that the guilt and shame items did, indeed, load on
separate, if correlated (r = .41), factors. In the obtained solution with oblimin rotation, the
four guilt items all loaded on the first factor (loadings .57 – .91) but not on the second
(loadings < .30), and the three shame items loaded on the second factor (loadings .47 –
.89), and not on the first (< .30). The two resulting scales had adequate internal reliabilities
(s = .77 and .67 for guilt and shame, respectively).
Reparation. Desire to make reparation to the Mapuche was measured with five
items which addressed issues of providing restitution to the Mapuche or reducing their
social exclusion (see Table 1). This scale had satisfactory internal reliability ( = .75).
Prejudice towards the Mapuche. It was felt important to control for participants‟
initial attitudes towards the Mapuche in view of previous research indicating correlation
between guilt and prejudice (Swim & Miller, 1999) and between prejudice and
compensatory attitudes (Leach, Iyer & Pederson, 2006). Therefore, a prejudice measure
was also included. This measure consisted of nine items taken or adapted from racism
measures used in other contexts (e.g. Lepore & Brown, 1997; Pettigrew & Meertens, 1995)
(see Table 1). This scale had good reliability (α = .81). One reviewer suggested that this
prejudice scale might be empirically indistinguishable from our measure of collective
shame. In fact, this proved not to be the case. A factor analysis of the shame and prejudice
items (principal axis method of extraction with oblimin rotation) confirmed that the shame
items loaded together on the same factor (loadings .49 to .70) and not on either of the two
factors that comprised the prejudice scale (all cross loadings < .30). And the Shame factor

15

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

was correlated only weakly with the two Prejudice factors (-.20 and -.28) which were
themselves moderately correlated with each other (+.47). Moreover, in the matched sample
that was used for the main analyses, Shame and Prejudice were again only weakly
correlated (see Table 2). It seems clear, then, that Shame and Prejudice were indeed clearly
separable constructs.
All the above items used a five point response format (1 = completely agree, 5 =
completely disagree) and recoded so that a high score indicates a high value of the
construct in question. In addition, various demographic details (e.g., age, sex) of
participants were recorded.
Results
We present the findings in three sections. First, we present the results from crosssectional analyses of the Time 1 (T1) and Time (T2) samples, considered separately. This
shows the pattern of contemporaneous associations among our primary variables. In the
second section we present the results of the longitudinal analyses in which we sought to
establish the power of collective guilt (and shame) to be able to predict reparation attitudes
at Time 2 (T2) as predicted by H1, and also to test the moderation hypothesis (H2). Finally,
as in any cross-lagged panel design, we explored the possible existence of “reverse” or
circular causal processes – namely, that prior reparation attitudes might influence
subsequent feelings of collective guilt and shame.
Cross-sectional analyses
The means and inter-correlations of the principal measures are presented in Table
2. From that table it can be seen that respondents showed moderate levels of reparation,
guilt and shame (all around the mid point of the scale), and rather low levels of prejudice
towards the Mapuche. From the upper right quadrant of the table it can be seen that, as

16

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

expected, collective guilt and shame are positively correlated with each other and both are
positively associated with reparation attitudes.
To examine their independent associations at T1, we regressed reparation attitudes
onto guilt and shame, and, in a subsequent step, the interaction term between these
predictors. The main predictors were centered prior to analysis. To be sure that these were
relatively “clean” estimates of the links between collective guilt, collective shame and
reparation, we first controlled respondents‟ age and level of prejudice. This multiple
regression explained a reasonable amount of the variance (R2 = .48, F(5,118) = 21.74, p <
.001) in which the only reliable predictors were Guilt (β = .34, p < .001) and Shame (β =
.40, p < .001). Thus, both guilt and shame were positively associated with reparation
attitudes in this cross-sectional analysis. Contrary to H2, the interaction term was not
reliable (β = -.05, p < .50).
At T2 the same regression analysis produced a very similar outcome: R2 = .55, F(5,115) =
28.12, p < .001. Once again, both Guilt and Shame were reliable and positive predictors of
Reparation attitudes, β = .47 and .29 respectively, both ps < .001. At this time point
Prejudice was also a reliable correlate of Reparation attitudes, β = -.20, p < .01. The
interaction between Guilt and Shame was again non-significant, β = -.03, p < .70.
Longitudinal analysis
Inspection of the left hand columns of Table 2 reveals very little change in the
mean levels of the variables. In fact, only Shame showed a significant reduction over time,
F(1,120) = 5.21, p < .05. Still, changes in mean levels are not very informative for testing
our hypotheses about the longitudinal influence of guilt and shame on reparation. To
examine this, we regressed T2 Reparation on T1 Guilt, Shame, and their interaction term,
whilst controlling for initial levels of Reparation (Bijleveld & Van der Kamp, 1998; Finkel,
1995). As before, age and initial prejudice levels were added as controls.

17

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

This longitudinal analysis also explained a respectable proportion of the variance in
the criterion measure (R2 = .37, F(6,114) = 11.19, p < .001). There were just two significant
effects. Unsurprisingly, the test-retest association for Reparation was significant (β = .43, p
< .001). The only other effect was for Guilt which was, as predicted by H1, a positive
predictor of T2 Reparation attitudes (β = .20, p < .05). In contrast, the main effect for
Shame was far from being significant (β = .03, p < .80). Contrary to H2, there was no
significant interaction between Guilt and Shame (β = .12, p < .20).
Reverse causal direction
As we have just seen, there is evidence that collective guilt does indeed have a
causal relationship in predicting reparation attitudes. However, it is possible that a circular
relationship exists such that prior reparation attitudes might have an influence on
subsequent levels of guilt. To examine this possibility, we reversed the logic of the
longitudinal analysis in the previous section. This time we regressed T2 Guilt on T1
Reparation attitudes and Shame, whilst controlling for T1 values of Guilt. As before, age
and prejudice level were added as controls. This analysis also accounted for respectable
amounts of variance in the dependent measure (R2 = .42, F(5,115) = 16.91, p < .001). There
were three significant effects: trivially, T1 Guilt was a strong predictor (β = .58, p < .001);
T1 Reparation also predicted T2 Guilt (β = .35, p < .001); as did Shame (β = -.24, p < .02).
A parallel analysis regressing T2 Shame on T1 values of the other variables also yielded a
good fit (R2 = .33, F(5,115) = 11.26, p < .001). In this analysis, the test-retest association of
Shame was reliable (β = .40, p < .001), as were the associations with T1 Reparation (β =
.27, p < .02) and Prejudice (β = -.22, p < .01).
Discussion
There are several noteworthy features of this study. First, as predicted by
Hypothesis 1, collective guilt did indeed have a longitudinal effect on reparation attitudes.

18

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Because our analysis controlled for initial levels of reparation (Finkel, 1995), there is some
basis for inferring a causal relationship between guilt and reparation. To our knowledge,
this is the first time that this has been demonstrated longitudinally in a field setting
although, of course, several other cross-sectional studies have found similar results (Iyer et
al., 2003; McGarty et al., 2005; Swim & Miller, 1999). Second, collective shame appeared
to have no direct causal link to reparation attitudes since the β value in the longitudinal
analysis was effectively zero. This stands in stark contrast to the longitudinal effect of guilt.
However, the collective shame measure cannot be dismissed as simply an unreliable or
impotent variable since it was a significant predictor of reparation attitudes in both the T1
and T2 cross-sectional analyses. Thus, in the short-term it appears that collective shame can
be “alleviated” in the same way as collective guilt, by increasing endorsement of reparation
attitudes. Its longer term effects are rather different however.
That said, there were some unexpected findings. First, it was interesting that there
seemed to be some “circular causality” at work since initial reparation attitudes also
predicted subsequent guilt and shame. In retrospect, this may not be so surprising. This
study may have been one of the first formal opportunities that these adolescent NonIndigenous Chileans had been questioned about their group‟s potential culpability for the
historical treatment of the Mapuche, and what might be done about that. It is not
implausible to imagine that having to answer questions about whether the Chilean
Government should apologize and make restitution to the Mapuche might have instigated
individual and social rumination about the ingroup‟s collective guilt. Given the relatively
short time lag of this study (8 weeks), the more they thought about and endorsed reparation
attitudes initially, the greater could have been their feelings of collective guilt and shame
later on. It is an interesting question whether such “circular causal” effects would still be
visible over a longer time period.

19

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

A second issue concerns the absence of any moderation of the longitudinal effects
of guilt on reparation by shame, as predicted by Hypothesis 2. Apart from the inherent
statistical difficulty in detecting interactions in correlational designs (McClelland & Judd,
1993), the substantive reason for this is not clear although, again, we speculate that it may
have to do with the relatively short time span of this longitudinal design. As we saw,
contemporaneously, shame had a positive association with reparation. It is possible that this
positive association “persisted” long enough for the predicted “inhibition” effect on guilt
not to manifest itself, but not long enough to produce any reliable longitudinal effect for
shame per se. In a second study we examine this possibility by introducing a much longer
time lag.
Study 2
Study 2 was a close replication of Study 1, with one critical difference. Instead of
the relatively short time lag of 8 weeks, we wanted to see whether the longitudinal effects
of guilt on reparation would persist for a much longer period – 6 months. If this was the
case, this would have important theoretical implications because it would provide evidence
for the robustness of the consequences of collective guilt. In addition, we sought to reexamine the hypothesized “inhibitory” consequences of shame over this same longer time
period.
Method
Participants
Two hundred and forty seven non-Indigenous secondary school students from the
Temuco area participated in the T1 data collection (119 male, 127 female, 1 unspecified;
mean age 16.02 years). Of these, 137 also participated at T2, approximately six months
later. This relatively heavy attrition rate was due partly to the more ambitious time lag, but
also because the two data collection points straddled the end and beginning of the academic

20

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

year in Chile with consequent loss of students due to administrative reasons (e.g., some
students changing schools or repeating the year). Nevertheless, as we report below, the
complete panel sample did not seem to differ much from the respondents who dropped out
after T1, thus giving us some confidence it was reasonably representative of the original
sample.
Procedure and measures
The procedure and measures were identical to Study 1. The measures all had
adequate or good internal reliabilities: collective guilt (α = .79), collective shame (α = .64),
reparation (α = .72) and prejudice (α = .76). As in Study 1, preliminary factor analysis
(principal axis method of extraction) with another larger (N = 376) but equivalent sample
of Non-Indigenous participants confirmed the distinctiveness of our collective guilt and
shame measures. Factor analysis with oblimin rotation produced the same two factor
solution as in Study 1, with guilt items loading on factor 1 (.58 – .89) but not on factor 2 (<
.30), while shame items loaded on factor 2 (.69 – .86) but not on factor 1 (< .30). The
correlation between the factors was .45. We again checked on the separability of the
Shame and Prejudice measures. A factor analysis of the shame and prejudice items
(principal axis method of extraction with oblimin rotation) showed that the shame items
loaded together on the same factor (loadings .52 to .77) and not on either of the two factors
that comprised the prejudice scale (all cross loadings < .30). The Shame factor was
correlated only weakly with the two Prejudice factors (-.23 and -.23) which were
themselves moderately intercorrelated (+.44). In the matched sample that was used for the
main analyses, Shame and Prejudice were only weakly associated (see Table 3). Once
again, it is apparent that Shame and Prejudice were clearly separable constructs.
Results

21

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

The results will be presented in four sections. First, we report on the effects of the
panel attrition. Then we report cross-sectional analyses from T1 and T2. Then we report on
the main longitudinal analysis in which H1 and H2 are tested. Finally, we check on any
“reverse causal” links.
Panel attrition
To assess the representativeness of our full panel sample (with data at both time
points), we compared this sample to those for whom we had data only at T1. One-way
ANOVAs on all the measures revealed no significant differences between the full
longitudinal sample and those who „dropped out‟ after T1. In only one respect did the two
samples differ: in the longitudinal sample there was a slightly lower proportion of males
than in the T1 only sample (43% vs. 55%, χ2 = 3.99, p < .05). This minor difference aside,
it seems safe to assume that the full panel was reasonably representative of the original
sample.
Cross-sectional analysis at T1 and T2
Means and inter-correlations of the main variables are shown in Table 3. From
there, it can be seen that the mean levels of reparation, guilt, shame and prejudice were all
very comparable to Study 1. From the upper right quadrant of the table it can be seen that,
as previously, collective guilt and shame were positively correlated with each other and
both positively associated with reparation attitudes.
To examine their independent associations at T1, we once again regressed
Reparation attitudes onto Guilt and Shame and, in a further step, the two-way interaction
between them. As before, we first controlled respondents‟ age and level of prejudice and
centered the main predictors. The final regression model accounted for a reasonable
proportion of the observed variance (R2 = .43, F(5,231) = 35.22, p < .001). Mirroring the
results from Study 1, the only reliable predictors were Guilt (β = .41, p < .001), Shame (β =

22

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

.24, p < .001) and the “control” variable Prejudice level (β = -.35, p < .001). Thus, both
guilt and shame were positively associated with reparation attitudes in this cross-sectional
analysis. The interaction term was not reliable ((β = -.02, p < .70).
The same regressions at T2 produced a similar outcome: R2 = .40, F(5,126) = 16.97,
p < .001. As before, both Guilt and Shame were reliable predictors of Reparation attitudes,
β = .40 and .23 respectively, ps < .001 and .01. Prejudice was also a reliable correlate of
Reparation attitudes, β = -.34, p < .001. The interaction between Guilt and Shame was
again non-significant, β = -.07, p < .40.
Longitudinal analysis
Inspection of the T1 and T2 means in Table 3 reveals that there was little change in
mean levels of the variables over time. The only significant change was for Shame,
F(1,136) = 4.14, p < .05. To test our hypotheses, Reparation attitudes at T2 were regressed
onto T1 values of Guilt, Shame, their interaction term, and age and prejudice level,
controlling for initial Reparation attitudes. This regression model accounted for an
adequate proportion of the variance (R2 = .24, F(6,126) = 6.68, p < .001). Apart from the
test-retest value for Reparation (β = .38, p < .001), the only significant effects were the
hypothesized (H1) main effect for Guilt (β = .22, p < .04) and the hypothesized (H2) Guilt
X Shame interaction (β = -.20, p < .02). The coefficient for Shame was far from being
significant, β = .07, p < .50. Following Aiken and West‟s (1991) suggestion, the Guilt X
Shame interaction was plotted applying the regression equation to a combination of two
values of Guilt and Shame (1 SD below the mean and 1 SD above the mean, labelled
“Low” and “High”, respectively), the results, which are presented in Figure 1, indicate that
the longitudinal effect of guilt on reparation increases at lower levels of shame, as predicted
by H2.
Reverse causal direction

23

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Confirming Study 1 and supporting Hypothesis 1, collective guilt appeared to be
causally related to reparation attitudes. What about the opposite pathway over this longer
time period? As before, we regressed T2 Guilt on T1 Reparation attitudes and Shame,
whilst controlling for T1 values of Guilt (age and prejudice level again included as
controls). This analysis also accounted for variance in the dependent measure (R2 = .23,
F(5,127) = 7.50, p < .001). However, there was only one reliable beta coefficient, the
unsurprising test-retest value for Guilt (β = .48, p < .001). All other coefficients were far
from being significant (all ps > .10). A parallel analysis regressing T2 Shame on T1 values
of the other variables also yielded a significant overall regression equation (R2 = .27,
F(5,127) = 9.29, p < .001) and, again, only the test-retest association of Shame was reliable
(β = .45, p < .001). All other coefficients were non-significant (all ps > .11). Thus, in this
study there was little evidence of “circular causality” from initial reparation to later feelings
of guilt or shame.

Discussion
This study provided a striking confirmation of our hypotheses. First, despite the
threefold increase in time lag, guilt was still significantly predictive of later reparation
attitudes, even when controlling for initial reparation attitudes. This supports Hypothesis 1.
Second, and supporting Hypothesis 2, this direct link was now moderated by collective
shame such that it held reliably only for those respondents reporting low initial levels of
collective shame. For High shame participants, the otherwise positive consequences of guilt
seem to have been suppressed, suggesting that, as we had suspected from the outset, that
collective guilt and shame have rather different consequences for people‟s desire to make
restitution for their ingroup‟s past misdeeds.

24

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

The effects of collective shame observed in Study 1 were also mirrored here. As
there, it proved to have little direct long-term effect on reparation attitudes. Its only reliable
and independent association was in the cross-sectional analyses. A possible explanation for
this correlation is that it reflects the genuine, if short-term, consequence of feeling
collectively shameful about the ingroup‟s misdeeds. As we speculated earlier, it is possible
that shame might be temporarily alleviated by attempting to “repair”, but only temporarily
because of the underlying negative attribution that shame implies. Such an attribution
means that longer term relief is more likely to be gained from avoidance strategies. Hence,
the “inhibition” of the longitudinal guilt-reparation relationship for high shame people.
If Study 2 largely confirmed Study 1, there was one important difference in the
pattern of results observed. This concerned the absence of any “reverse” path between
reparation and guilt here as compared to Study 1. Here, the difference in time lags between
the two studies also seems a plausible explanation for the inconsistency. The argument
advanced earlier for the reparation-guilt causal link was that being asked to reflect on
reparation issues at T1 might have instigated increased feelings of guilt in the minds of the
non-Indigenous participants. Such a reflexive process may have been less likely over the
six month duration of the second study, especially since that time gap also involved
changes in school classes and likely other significant events in the lives of our adolescent
participants. If the apparently unidirectional causal link that we observed in Study 2 is
confirmed in further research over longer periods, this would add strength to the reasoning
behind the hypothesis that predicted it.
Finally, we acknowledge the undesirably high attrition rate and the consequent loss
of statistical power in our longitudinal analyses. Although we had designed the study to be
substantially larger, for administrative and other reasons outside our control we did lose
many more participants than we had wished. Still, despite the attrition, it seems that the full

25

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

panel sample did not differ substantially from the originally conceived one, and the
findings it yielded were reasonably clear-cut.
Study 3
In Studies 1 and 2 we have shown that guilt, but not shame, has reliable longitudinal
main effects on reparation attitudes. This was entirely consistent with theoretical
expectations. Somewhat less expected, though, were the equally reliable cross-sectional
positive correlations between collective shame and reparation attitudes. In this third study
we investigate what might be underlying those associations. Whilst doing so, we will also
take the opportunity to refine our key measures in order to improve their validity and
internal reliability.
Earlier it was noted how conceptualizations of collective shame have included two
aspects. One stresses the perception of some negative ingroup “essence” that might be to
blame for the immoral actions by ingroup members (Lickel et al., 2004); the other focuses
more on how the public reputation of the ingroup might have been damaged by those same
reprehensible deeds of its members (Branscombe et al., 2004). In practice, as we noted
earlier, we suspect that these two components will often be closely associated since the
awareness of a besmirched ingroup reputation in the eyes of others may well lead to a
similar negative perception of the ingroup by its members. Still, insofar as collective shame
does involve such reputational aspects, this does imply that one strategy for coping with it
is to “manage” the ingroup‟s reputation by appearing to endorse some restitution to the
outgroup. A contemporary illustration of this process at work was provided by Ken
Livingston, mayor of London. Commenting on the 200th anniversary of the abolition of
slavery in Britain, Mr Livingston said: “A British state that refuses to apologise for a crime
on such a gigantic scale as the slave trade merely lowers our country in the opinion of the
world” (as quoted in the Guardian newspaper, 24 March 2007).

26

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Research support for this image management consequence of shame was found by
Schmader and Lickel (2006). They asked Hispanic participants to identify an event in
which a member of their group had done something to confirm a negative stereotype about
Hispanics. Feelings of shame about that event were correlated with a desire to repair the
image of the ingroup. Such a strategy may be particularly efficacious in the short term –
i.e., when confronted with investigators presenting questionnaire items concerning
reparation attitudes – since it so easily serves what we believe to be its self (and ingroup)
presentational needs. However, such a strategy may be more costly, and hence less likely to
be adopted, over a longer period of time. A more likely longer term strategy for reducing
shame feelings, we argue, might be denial or other forms of social or cognitive avoidance.
If this analysis is correct, then it would explain why it is possible to observe positive
shame-reparation associations cross-sectionally (Studies 1 and 2; Brown & Čehajić, 2006;
Harvey & Oswald, 2000), but not longitudinally. One further implication is that such a
shame-reparation link will be mediated by a desire to protect or improve the ingroup‟s
image in the eyes of others. Study 3 was designed to explore this hypothesis of mediation
of the shame-reparation cross-sectional association.
As noted earlier, Iyer et al. (2007) and Leach et al. (2006) have suggested that guilt
may be a less important predictor of compensatory attitudes than anger. Indeed, Iyer et al.
(2007) found that the effects of both guilt and shame disappeared once anger was
controlled. To check whether anger could also account for the guilt-reparation and shamereparation associations we have observed, we included a measure of anger in this new
study.
In Studies 1 and 2 the measure of collective shame tapped mainly the negative
ingroup essence component of shame. Moreover, the items comprising it (deliberately)
eschewed the words “shame” or “ashamed” since we wanted to avoid semantic overlap

27

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

with the items comprising the guilt scale. Although we were successful in the latter aim, it
has to be conceded that the reliability of the three-item shame measure was sub-optimal
and may also have lacked some face validity. Thus, a second goal of this third study was to
enlarge and improve the measure of collective shame. We sought to do this in four ways.
First, by adding items that captured more directly the “reputational” aspect of the emotion.
Second, by incorporating the key emotion words “shame”, “ashamed” and “humiliated”
and tying them specifically to the “negative essence” and “reputational” concepts. Third,
by focussing more directly on felt emotions. In the earlier version of the scale, it might be
argued, there was some conflation of the appraisal aspect of emotion – “when I think of the
manner in which the Mapuche have been treated, I think that we ……are predisposed to be
racist” – with the emotion of shame itself. In this improved version, therefore, we make
feelings of shame (and associated emotions) absolutely explicit and distinct from mere
appraisals of threats to the ingroup‟s image. Fourth, by increasing the range and number of
items dealing with the historical mistreatment of indigenous peoples in Chile. At the same
time, we also aimed to improve the internal reliabilities of the guilt and reparation measures
and included some additional measures to check for alternative interpretations of the
observed effects.
The hypotheses of this cross-sectional study were as follows:
1.

Based on Studies 1 and 2 and other empirical work (e.g., Harvey & Oswald, 2000),

it was predicted that both collective guilt and shame would be independently and positively
associated with reparation attitudes.
2.

It was predicted that the shame-reparation link would be mediated by a desire to

improve the ingroup‟s public reputation.
Method
Participants

28

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Participants were 193 students (undergraduate and pre-undergraduate induction) at
a university in Santiago, Chile (M = 91, F = 93, 9 unspecified; Mage= 16.89, range 14 – 34
years) who agreed to take part on a voluntary basis.
Procedure
Participants filled out the questionnaire in Spanish in class time. The questionnaire
was described as being a Study of Social Attitudes and began with a brief introductory
paragraph that referred to the historical conflicts between the Mapuche and the NonIndigenous groups over land, culture and language issues. Participants then filled out the
questionnaire. Following completion of the questionnaire, participants were debriefed.
Measures
Collective guilt. This comprised eight items. Three of these were from Studies 1 and
2 (or were close approximations thereof and five were new (see Table 1). Altogether, these
8 items produced a highly reliable scale, α = .93.
Collective shame. This comprised 10 items all of which explicitly tapping
emotions related to the different facets of shame (see Table 1). These 10 items also
made a highly reliable scale, α = .93.
Appraisal of image threat. A separate scale specifically measuring appraisals of the
threat to the ingroup‟s image rather than the actual emotions caused by those appraisals,
was also devised from three items (see Table 1), α = .75.
Reparation attitudes. This comprised the five original items, together with two new
ones (see Table 1). This scale also had a satisfactory internal reliability, α = .86.
Reputation management. This was a new scale that tapped a concern with and a
desire to improve the reputation of the ingroup (Chile). It consisted of 9 items (see Table
1). This scale had very good internal reliability, α = .91.

29

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Anger. Three items tapped participants‟ anger at the past mistreatment of the
Mapuche (see Table 1). These formed a reliable scale, α = .86.
All items used a 7 point response format (1 = completely disagree, 7 =
completely agree) so that a high score indicated a high value of the construct. Various
demographic details (e.g., age, sex) of participants were also recorded.
Results
The results from this study are presented in two sections. In the first we present
factor analysis of the new collective guilt and shame scales to demonstrate their empirical
distinctiveness. In the second section we present findings from multiple regression analyses
that tested our two hypotheses.
Collective guilt and shame measures
All 18 items comprising the guilt and shame scales were factor analysed using the
principal axis extraction method with oblimin rotation. Inspection of the eigen values and
the scree slope clearly indicated a two-factor solution (59.4% variance accounted for). All
the guilt items loaded on the same factor (loadings .58 to .90, and cross-loadings on the
other factor, < .12). All the shame items loaded on the second factor (loadings .65 to .85,
with cross-loadings on the other factor < .13). This analysis thus provided excellent
evidence for the distinctiveness of the new guilt and shame scales and, as noted earlier,
both had excellent internal reliabilities (> .90). As usual, these overall Guilt and Shame
scales were moderately inter-correlated, r(186) = .68, p < .001.
Regression analyses
Table 4 presents the means, standard deviations of the principal variables used in
the multiple regression analyses. To test our mediation hypothesis for the shame –
reparation link, we regressed Reparation attitudes onto Guilt and Shame in a first step, and
then added our measure of Reputation management in a second step (Baron & Kenny,

30

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

1986). The variance explained in the first step of this model was respectable, R2 = .37, F(2,
183) = 54.36, p < .001. In this first step, both Guilt and Shame were reliable predictors of
Reparation attitudes, βs = .34 and .32 respectively, both p < .0013. Adding Reputation
management in the second step produced a reliable increase in variance explained, ΔR2 =
.065, Fchange = 21.04, p < .001. The regression coefficient for Guilt dropped only slightly
in this step, β = .30, p < .001, while that for Shame dropped markedly, β = .15, to become
non-significant (p < .07). And, as expected, the coefficient for the mediator was also
highly reliable, β = .32, p < .001. The Sobel test for the predicted mediation of Shame by
Reputation management was reliable, z = 3.76, p < .001, indicating that mediation had
occurred4 A test for possible mediation of the Guilt – Reparation effect proved non
significant, z = 1.49, p < .14. Finally, only Shame predicted Reputation management, β =
.53, p < .001; the coefficient for Guilt was small and unreliable, β =.12, p < .12.
Next we checked for various alternative explanations of the above finding. In a
further regression analysis we added Appraisal of image threat in a first step, before
entering Guilt and Shame. The logic here was to demonstrate that the associations between
Guilt and Shame held even when controlling for threat appraisals. It seemed that they did.
Though Appraisal of image threat had a reliable association with reparation, β = .40, p <
.001, the relationships between Guilt, Shame and Reparation were still highly significant in
the second step of the analysis, β = .34, p < .001, and β = .24, p < .005, respectively.
Moreover, adding the Reputation mediator in the final step still resulted in a non-significant
effect for Shame, β = .14, p < .11, a reduction that a Sobel test indicated was reliable, z =
2.85, p < .005. In contrast, the beta for Guilt was little affected by the addition of the
mediator, β = .30, p < .001.
In a further analysis, we examined whether our effects for Guilt and Shame held
even when controlling for Anger about the plight of the Mapuche (Iyer et al., 2007).

31

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Accordingly, we added Anger in the first step, β = .49, p < .001. However, in the second
step Guilt and Shame still proved to be reliable predictors of reparation attitude, β = .27 and
.26 respectively, both p < .001. Moreover, the hypothesized mediation of the Shame effect
was still clearly visible in the third step: the Shame effect dwindled to non-significance,
β = .12, p < .16, a reliable mediation effect according to a Sobel test, z = 3.47, p < .001; the
Guilt effect was little changed, β =.24, p < .001. Thus, it seems that our effects pertain
above and beyond any role played by Anger.
Finally, we added both Appraisal of image threat and Anger as controls in the first
step of the regression. Both proved to be independent predictors of Reparation attitude,
β = .28 and .41 respectively, both p < .001. Nevertheless, the Guilt and Shame effects were
still significant in the third step, even with both controls added: Guilt, β = .28, p < .001;
Shame, β = .20, p < .03. And the predicted mediation of the Shame-Reparation link was
still observable in the final step, while the Guilt-Reparation link was little affected: Guilt,
β = .25, p < .001; Shame, β = .11, p < .20. Again, a Sobel test indicated that mediation had
occurred, z = 2.64, p < .01.
Discussion
The results from this third study support our hypothesis about one of the possible
underlying reasons for the cross-sectional association between Shame and Reparation
attitudes. As we had surmised, that association is mediated by a desire to improve or
maintain the ingroup‟s reputation. Moreover, the shame-reparation link, and its mediation,
held even when controlling for appraisals of threat to the ingroup‟s image and anger over
the treatment of the Mapuche.
Three other features of this study deserve comment. One concerns the development
of improved measures of guilt and shame. The new measures now had high internal
reliabilities, had good face validity in the sense that they now clearly tapped intergroup

32

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

emotions and not appraisals and, as we have seen, were both predictive of reparation
attitudes. In the absence of an alternative contextualized measure of shame elsewhere, we
look forward to other investigators exploring its potential in other fields.
The second noteworthy point concerns the consistency of the results from the crosssectional analyses across all three studies, despite the use of different scales and university
instead of school students in this third study. As we have seen, both collective guilt and
shame are reliably associated with reparation attitudes contemporaneously. Although
existing theory conventionally does not predict such prosocial effects for shame, there
seems little doubt about the empirical robustness of the finding (see also, Brown & Čehajić,
2006; Harvey & Oswald, 2000).
Third, it is interesting that these associations between guilt, shame and reparation
held even when controlling for anger over the plight of the outgroup. This finding contrasts
with that of Iyer et al. (2007) who found that neither guilt nor shame were predictive of
reparation when anger was controlled (though cf. Leach et al., 2006). There would seem to
be two possible explanations for this disparity. One lies in the measures of guilt, shame and
anger used in the two studies. Iyer et al. (2007) used a technique developed by Lickel et al.
(2005) in which respondents are asked to indicate how much of each of several emotions
(e.g., guilty, remorseful, ashamed, disgraced, furious, angry) they felt about the situation in
Iraq. As the authors acknowledge, this method introduces some ambiguity about whether
the emotions are personally or group based. In contrast, our guilt, shame and anger items
are explicit in their reference to emotions felt about what the ingroup has (or has not) done
to the outgroup. By contextualizing the questions in this way, we believe that our scales are
more clearly focussing on intergroup emotions. A second explanation for the difference
between the studies is that Iyer et al. (2007) were focussing on a contemporary and highly
charged political situation (the ongoing war in Iraq), whilst our Chilean Indigenous-Non-

33

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Indigenous relationship comprises a mixture of some contemporary but mainly historical
mistreatment of the outgroup. Conceivably, with the passage of time, self-conscious
emotions like guilt and shame regain some of their potency to predict reparative tendencies
independently of anger, whilst with ongoing ingroup transgressions the latter emotion may
have more immediate action potential (Leach et al., 2006).
General Discussion
In drawing general conclusions from these three studies, we would make the
following brief remarks.
First, we believe that our findings help to substantiate the theoretical distinction
between guilt and shame at a collective level. Although several commentators have argued
that guilt and shame have different underlying psychologies and should have different
social consequences (Branscombe et al., 2004; Lickel et al., 2004; Tangney & Fischer,
1995), until now there has been little direct evidence to demonstrate this at an intergroup
level. Apart from Lickel et al.(2005), who included “friends” together with groups proper
like “family” and “ethnicity” as potential sources of “vicarious” shame and guilt, and Iyer
et al.‟s (2007) recent study of reactions to the war in Iraq, there has been little research
showing that the two collective emotions can be distinguished empirically and then lead to
different outcomes. In the studies reported here, we have shown not only that they can be
reliably measured but they have different longitudinal effects: collective guilt leads to a
subsequent increase in reparative attitudes towards the outgroup, albeit especially for low
shame people, whilst collective shame appears to have only short term effects on reparation
and no independent longitudinal effects. In parentheses, we can also note that collective
shame has also been observed to be positively correlated with reparation attitudes in crosssectional studies conducted in very different contexts, post-conflict Bosnia (Brown &
Čehajić, 2006) and interethnic relations in the US (Harvey & Oswald, 2000).

34

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Second, our findings shed further light on the consequences of collective shame. As
we have shown, shame seems to be a response to both a perception that the ingroup is
flawed in some way and to a concern about how others see the ingroup. This latter
“reputational” aspect of shame is what can lead to short-term prosocial effects as ingroup
members seek to present their group in a better light (Schmader & Lickel, 2006). The
mediation results from Study 3 are certainly consistent with this analysis. One interesting
further implication of this argument could be to examine the consequences of making
reparation attempts public as opposed to allowing them to remain anonymous. If collective
shame is primarily concerned with the potential damage to the image of the ingroup, then
one might expect it to be more sensitive to such anonymity manipulations than would be
collective guilt. There is some preliminary evidence to support such a contention (Coen &
Brown, 2005). However, in noting that shame can have short term prosocial effects, we do
not wish to imply that it cannot also have the kinds of negative consequences that
traditional theorizing predicts. Indeed, we suspect that the fundamentally aversive quality
of shame leads people to “take to the path of least resistance” in dealing with it. In
questionnaire studies, as here, the easiest course may be one of reputation management,
endorsing or claiming to endorse restitution to the outgroup. In other contexts, blaming the
victim group or avoiding it may be a less effortful option. A recent experimental study in
which collective shame was independently manipulated from collective guilt found
evidence of just such negative reactions (Brown & Chatfield, 2006).
Third, whilst we believe that our findings have clarified some fundamental issues in
this burgeoning research domain, there is obviously much still to be done. For example, it
will be important to investigate the antecedents of collective guilt and shame. At the start of
this paper, we noted that there are some trends in international politics towards identifying,
and then encouraging acceptance of responsibility for, illegitimate collective actions.

35

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

However, history is replete with the failure of groups to acknowledge their misdeeds (e.g.,
Cohen, 2001). So, one question is to identify the conditions which give rise to people‟s
experience of their ingroup‟s culpability and what form that self-conscious emotion takes
(shame or guilt). In two recent studies in Bosnia, we have found that a key antecedent of
collective guilt is some acknowledgement of and acceptance of responsibility for the
ingroup‟s misdeeds, while an appraisal of the extent to which the misdeeds threaten the
ingroup‟s image in the eyes of others seems to stimulate collective shame (Čehajić &
Brown, 2006). Lastly, it will obviously be important to extend the longitudinal work we
have initiated here to include more than two measuring points and a longer time lag. Such a
design would give a more complete picture of the temporal dynamics involved in the
relationships between collective guilt, shame and various outcome variables.
Finally, we believe that our findings on the beneficial consequences of collective
guilt have practical implications. Given that they were obtained from adolescent students,
we are encouraged to believe that incorporating material into educational curricula that
highlighted the part of dominant groups in perpetrating injustices could play a useful role in
raising awareness and changing attitudes. But, to end on a cautionary note, we would not
want to argue that stimulating collective guilt can act as a universal panacea for rectifying
intergroup inequalities. For one thing, we have evidence from elsewhere in our research
programme that it can be (adversely) implicated in mediating between outgroup contact,
knowledge and intergroup anxiety (Zagefka, Gonzalez, Brown & Manzi, 2005). And it is
possible that too frequent and repeated reminders of ingroup misdeeds could eventually
transform the socially progressive emotion of collective guilt into the more introspective
and potentially harmful emotion of collective shame.

36

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

References
Aiken, L.S. & West, S.G. (1991) Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting
interactions. London: Sage.
Barkan, E. (2000). The guilt of nations. London: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in
social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.

Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A. M., & Heatherton, T. F. (1994). Guilt: An interpersonal
approach. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 243-267.
Bijleveld, C. J. H., & van der Kamp, L. J. T. (1998). Longitudinal data analysis: Designs,
models and methods. London: Sage.
Branscombe, N., Slugoski, B., & Kappen, D. M. (2004). The measurement of collective
guilt: What it is and what it is not. In N. Branscombe & B. Doosje (Eds.), Collective guilt:
International perspectives (pp. 16-34). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Branscombe, N. R., & Doosje, B. (2004). Collective Guilt: International perspectives. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, R. & Čehajić, S. (2006). Dealing with the past and facing the future: Mediators of
the effects of collective guilt and shame in Bosnia. Unpubl. MS., University of Sussex,
under review.
Brown, R., & Chatfield, J. (2006). Shame on us: Social consequences of a group-based
dysphoric emotion. Unpublished MS, University of Sussex, under review.
Buruma, I. (1994). The Wages of Guilt: Memories of war in Germany and Japan. London:
Jonathan Cape.

37

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Čehajić, S. & Brown, R. (2006). “The Burden of Our Times”: Antecedents of groupbased guilt and shame. Unpublished MS, University of Sussex. Under review.
Cialdini, R. B., Borden, R. J., Thorne, A., Walker, M. R., Freeman, S., & Sloan, L. R.
(1976). Basking in reflected glory: Three (football) field studies. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 34, 366-374.
Coen, S., & Brown, R. (2005). It depends on your point of view: Perspective taking,
anonymity and the experience of group based guilt and shame. Paper presented at the
Social Psychology Section of the British Psychological Society, Edinburgh.
Cohen, S. (2001). States of Denial: Knowing about atrocities and suffering. Oxford: Polity
Press.
Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi-Experimentation. Design & Analysis issues
for field settings. London: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Doosje, B., Branscombe, N. R., Spears, R., & Manstead, A. S. R. (1998). Guilty by
association: When one's group has a negative history. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 872-886.
Finkel, S. E. (1995). Causal analysis with panel data. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Harvey, R. D., & Oswald, D. L. (2000). Collective guilt and shame as motivation for
White support for Black programs. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30, 17901811.
Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2000). Essentialist beliefs about social categories.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 113-127.
Instituto Nacionalde Estadística. (2002). Estadísticas sociales de los pueblos indígenas en
Chile. Santiago de Chile: Gobierno de Chile.
Iyer, A., Leach, C. W., & Crosby, F. (2003). White guilt and racial compensation: The
benefits and limits of self-focus. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 117-129.

38

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Iyer, A., Schmader, T. & Lickel, B. (2007). Why individuals protest the perceived
transgressions of their country: The role of anger, shame and guilt. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 33, 572-587.
Leach, C., Iyer, A., & Pederson, A. (2006). Anger and guilt about ingroup advantage
explain the willingness for political action. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 32, 1232-1245.
Leach, C.W., Snider, N & Iyer, A. (2002). "Poisoning the consciences of the fortunate":
The experience of relative advantage and support for social equality. In, I. Walker and H.
Smith (Eds) Relative Deprivation: Specification, development and integration. (pp. 136163). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lepore, L., & Brown, R. (1997). Category activation and stereotype accessibility: Is
prejudice inevitable? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 275-287.
Lewis, H. B. (1971). Shame and Guilt in Neurosis. New York: International Universities
Press.
Lickel, B., Schmader, T., & Barquissau, M. (2004). The evocation of moral emotions in
intergroup contexts: The distinction between collective guilt and collective shame. In N.
Branscombe & B. Doosje (Eds.), Collective guilt: International perspectives (pp. 35-55).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lickel, B., Schmader, T., Curtis, M., Scarnier, M. & Ames, D. R. (2005). Vicarious shame
and guilt. Group Processes and Intergroup Relations, 8, 145-157.
McGarty, C., Pederson, A., Leach, C. W., Mansell, T., Waller, J., & Bliuc, A.-M. (2005).
Group-based guilt as a predictor of commitment to apology. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 44, 659-680.
McClelland, G. H., & Judd, C. M. (1993). The statistical difficulties of detecting

39

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

interactions and moderator effects. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 376-390.
Mead, G. H. (1934). On Social Psychology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ministerio de Planificación y Cooperación. (2003). Informe comisión de verdad histórica y
nuevo trato de los pueblos indígenas. Santiago: Gobierno de Chile.
Niedenthal, P. M., Tangney, J. P., & Gavanski, I. (1994). "If only I weren't" versus "If only
I hadn't": Distinguishing shame and guilt in counterfactual thinking. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 67, 585-595.
Pederson, A., Beven, J., Walker, I., & Griffiths, B. (2004). Attitudes toward indigenous
Australians: The role of empathy and guilt. Journal of Community and Applied Social
Psychology, 14, 233-249.
Pettigrew, T. F., & Meertens, R. W. (1995). Subtle and blatant prejudice in western Europe.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 25, 57-75.
Roccas, S., Klar, Y., & Liviatan, I. (2004). Exonerating cognitions, group identification,
and personal values as predictors of collective guilt among Jewish-Israelis. In N.
Branscombe & B. Doosje (Eds.), Collective Guilt: International perspectives (pp. 130147). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Roseman, I. J., West, C., & Schwartz, T. S. (1994). Phenomenology, Behaviors, and Goals
differentiate discrete emotions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 206221.
Saiz, J.-L. (2002). Atribución de estereotipos: Los indígenas mapuches que perciben los
chilenos. In J. F. Morales, D. Páez, A. L. Kornblit & D. Asún (Eds.), Psicología social (pp.
145-151). Buenos Aires: Prentice Hall-Pearson Education.
Schmader, T. & Lickel, B. (2006). Stigma and Shame: Emotional responses to the
stereotypic actions of one's ethnic ingroup. In, S. Levin & C. van Laar (Eds) Stigma and
Group Inequality: Social psychological approaches. NY: Erlbaum.

40

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Shaver, P., Schwartz, J., Kirson, D., & O'Connor, C. (1987). Emotion knowledge: Further
exploration of a prototype approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52,
1061-1086.
Smith , E. R. (1993). Social identity and social emotions: Toward new
conceptualizations of prejudice. In D. M. Mackie & D. L. Hamilton (Eds.), Affect,
cognition and stereotyping (pp. 297-315). San Diego: Academic Press.
Smith, R. H., Webster, J. M., Parrott, W. G., & Eyre, H. L. (2002). The role of public
exposure in moral and non-moral shame and guilt. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 83, 138-159.
Steele, S. (1990). The Content of our Character: A new vision of race in America. New
York: St Martin's Press.
Swim, J. K., & Miller, D. L. (1999). White guilt: Its antecedents and consequences for
attitudes toward affirmative action. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 500514.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In S.
Worchel & W. G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 7-24). Chicago:
Nelson Hall.
Tangney, J. P. (1991). Moral affect: The good, the bad, and the ugly. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 598-607.
Tangney, J. P., & Fischer, K. W. (1995). Self conscious emotions: The psychology of
shame, guilt, embarrassment and pride. New York: Guilford.
Tangney, J. P., Miller, R. S., Flicker, L., & Barlow, D. H. (1996). Are Shame, Guilt and
Embarrassment distinct emotions? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70,
1256-1269.
Tangney, J. P., Wagner, P., Fletcher, C., & Gramzow, R. (1992). Shamed into anger?

41

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

The relation of shame and guilt to anger and self-reported aggression. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 669-675.
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., & Wetherell, M. S. (1987).
Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory. Oxford: Blackwell.
Weiner, B. (1995). Judgements of responsibility: A foundation for a theory of social
conduct. New York: Guilford Press.
Yzerbyt, V. Y., Rocher, S., & Schadron, G. (1997). Stereotypes as explanations: A
subjective essentialistic view of group perception. In R. Spears, P. J. Oakes, N. Ellemers &
A. Haslam (Eds.), The social psychology of stereotyping and group life (pp. 20-50).
Oxford: Blackwell.
Zagefka, H., Gonzalez, R., Brown, R., & Manzi, J. (2005). To know you is to love you?:
Differential longitudinal effects of intergroup contact and knowledge on intergroup anxiety
and prejudice among Indigenous and Non-Indigenous Chileans. Unpublished MS,
University of Sussex.

42

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Author Note
Rupert Brown and Sabina Čehajić, Psychology Department, University of Sussex,
Brighton, United Kingdom; Roberto González and Jorge Manzi, Escuela de Psicología,
Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile;
Hanna Zagefka, Psychology Department, Royal Holloway, University of London.
This research was supported by grant from the Chilean National Funding for
Scientific and Technological research program (FONDECYT, grant Nº 1020954) allocated
to Roberto González. We gratefully acknowledge the perceptive comments of Colin Leach
and Anja Zimmermann on an earlier version of this paper.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Rupert Brown,
Department of Psychology, Pevensey 1, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, BN1
9QH, United Kingdom. E-mail: r.brown@sussex.ac.uk

43

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Footnotes
1. The use of causal terminology here must, of course, be taken in the context of the
correlational designs of our studies. Although the longitudinal designs of Studies 1 and 2
permit stronger causal inferences than cross-sectional designs, definitive statements about
causality should still be made cautiously.
2. This sample comprised a different group of Non-Indigenous school students who were
taking part in a closely related study to the one reported here. The larger N permitted a
statistically robust analysis of the factorial structure of the guilt and shame items.
3. The Guilt X Shame was non-significant in these analyses and so is not considered
further. In Studies 1 and 2 also there were no interactions between guilt and shame at a
cross-sectional level.
4. It is also worth noting that we obtained very similar results in another study (N =
192 Chilean university students). In that study we used rather similar measures of
Guilt and Shame to Studies 1 and 2 – in fact, they correlated .79 and .73 respectively
with the original measures – and identical measures of Reparation attitude and
Reputation management to those used in Study 3. Regressing Reparation on Guilt and
Shame yielded significant effects for both, β = .28 and .39, both p < .001. Adding the
mediator in a second step affected the Guilt relationship little (β = .25, p < .001) but
reduced the Shame effect noticeably (β = .30, p < .01), a significant drop according to
a Sobel test, z = 2.54, p < .02.

44

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Table 1
Items of principal measures
Measure

Studies 1 & 2

Study 3

Collective Guilt

I feel guilty for what we, the Non-Indigenous I feel guilty for the manner in
Chileans, have done to the Mapuche in the

which the Mapuche have been treated

past

in the past by Non-Indigenous Chileans

When I think about the racism that exists

When I think how Non-Indigenous have

towards the Mapuche, I feel guilty to be

stolen the Mapuche lands, I feel guilty

a Non-Indigenous Chilean
I feel very bad when I realise what we
To think how we Non-Indigenous Chileans

the Non-Indigenous Chileans have contributed

have stolen the Mapuche lands makes me feel
to the loss of Mapuche language and customs
guilty
Sometimes I feel guilty for the things that
I feel guilty when I realise that we
Indigenous Chileans have contributed to

NonNon-Indigenous Chileans have done
to the Mapuche

the loss of Mapuche language and customs
When I think what Non-Indigenous
Chileans have done to the Mapuche, I feel
guilty

Even if I have done nothing bad, I
feel guilty for the behaviour
of Non-Indigenous Chileans
toward the Mapuche

I feel guilty for the bad living
conditions of the Mapuche

To think how we Chileans show
intolerance, by refusing to offer job
contracts to Mapuche people, makes me feel
guilty

Collective Shame Due to the long history of discrimination

I feel bad because the behaviour of

against the Mapuche, I think that we

Non-Indigenous Chileans towards the

Non-Indigenous Chileans are predisposed

Mapuche people has created a bad image

to be racist

in the eyes of the world

45

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

When I think of the manner in which the

I feel bad when I see an international report

Mapuche have been treated, I sometimes

on the treatment received by the Mapuche

think that we Non-Indigenous Chileans are

on the part of Non-Indigenous Chileans

racist and mean

Even though I do not discriminate against the Sometimes it shames me how others can think of us
Mapuche, I feel bad when I realise that

for the manner in which we have

other Non-Indigenous Chileans do

harmed the Mapuche

To think how Chile is seen for its treatment
of the Mapuche makes me feel ashamed

I feel humiliated when I think of the
negative manner that Chile is seen by the
rest of the world for how it has treated the
Mapuche

I feel shame when I think how
Non-Indigenous Chileans have behaved
towards the Mapuche

I feel ashamed to be a Non-Indigenous
Chilean for the way we have treated the
Mapuche

I feel ashamed for the damage done to the
Mapuche by Non-Indigenous Chileans

I feel ashamed for the racist tendency of NonIndigenous Chileans

It shames me when I realise that
Non-Indigenous Chileans could be
intolerant by nature

Reparation

I feel that the Mapuche should have

I feel that the Mapuche should have

Attitude

economic benefits as a reparation for the

economic benefits as a reparation for the

damage that we‟ve caused them

damage that we‟ve caused them

46

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Our government should apologise for

Our government should apologise for

all the maltreatment and deprivation that

all the maltreatment and deprivation that

we‟ve caused to the Mapuche

we‟ve caused to the Mapuche

I would like my school to have more class
I would like my school to have more class
materials (books, magazines, musical

materials (books, magazines, musical

instruments, etc.) that would allow us to

instruments, etc.) that would allow us to

have a better understanding of the

have a better understanding of the

history and culture of the Mapuche

history and culture of the Mapuche

I would like our country to be more tolerant

I would like our country to be more tolerant

and to have a good relationship

and to have a good relationship

between the Mapuche and

between the Mapuche and

Non-Indigenous Chileans

Non-Indigenous Chileans

I think that in recent times the media have

I think that in recent times the media have

devoted too much space to speak ill

devoted too much space to speak ill

of the Mapuche

of the Mapuche

Chilean universities should have special
scholarships for Mapuche students

When they offer work, private companies
should guarantee positions to Mapuche people

Prejudice

I would be bothered if most of my
class-mates were Mapuche

I would be concerned if my teacher or
boss was Mapuche

I would feel uncomfortable sitting
next to a Mapuche person on a bus

Mapuche people should be
marginalised in Chilean society

If I would meet a Mapuche person in the

47

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

street, I would feel tense and nervous

Sometimes I think that this country
would be better off with fewer Mapuche

The Mapuche exaggerate their problems
to get help

The Mapuche‟s problems are due to
themselves

The Mapuche receive more help
from the government than they really deserve

Anger

Sometimes I feel angry when I think what my
group has done to Mapuche people in the past

Thinking about how my group has treated
Mapuche people makes me feel angry

Talking about the past and the issues
regarding the treatment of Mapuche people
by my group makes me angry
Reputation
Management

I would like to improve the image of Chile
in the rest of the world in respect of how
we treat indigenous peoples

I believe we should restore the
international reputation of Chile associated
with the treatment of indigenous peoples

I would like other people to have a better
impression of Chile as a country in relation
to how we have treated indigenous peoples

I want other countries to respect us again for
the way we treat indigenous people

48

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

I believe that it is important that Chile is
seen in a more favourable manner by the
rest of the world in relation to indigenous issues

If we do not resolve the outstanding issues
about the indigenous people in Chile, it will
damage us as a country

If we do not change our attitude towards the
indigenous people the international image
of Chile will become negative

In order for Chile to improve, it should
address the indigenous issues

The reputation that Chile has at an international
level depends to a large extent on the
treatment that we give to the indigenous
peoples
Image Threat
Appraisal

I consider that our image as Chileans has been
negatively affected by the way we have
addressed Mapuche issues

Sometimes I believe that Chile has lost
respect for the way it has dealt with Mapuche
issues

Due to the way we have addressed the
Mapuche issues, I believe that now
people judge Chileans negatively

49

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Table 2
Study 1: Means of and inter-correlations among principal variables
MT1

SD

MT2

SD

Reparation Guilt

Shame

Prejudice

Reparation 3.52

.86

3.48

.83

.57

.59/.66

.62/.60

-.24/-.34

Guilt

2.96

1.03

2.89

1.04

.46

.59

.58/.57

-.15/-.15

Shame

3.62

.91

3.40

1.01

.41

.28

.45

-.25/-.26

Prejudice

2.31

.78

2.35

.88

-.20

-.17

-.32

.51

Notes
1. Coefficients on or below the diagonal in bold type are T1-T2 correlations (e.g., from T1
values of variables in column 1 to T2 values in variables in top row). Above the diagonal
are cross-sectional correlations at T1/T2
2. rs ≥ .20, p < .05; rs ≥ .25 p < .01; rs ≥ .32 p < .001, two tailed.

50

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Table 3
Study 2: Means of and inter-correlations among principal variables
MT1

SD

MT2

SD

Reparation Guilt

Shame

Prejudice

Reparation 3.44

.99

3.44

.99

.40

.58/.55

.50/.48

-.35/-.43

Guilt

2.98

1.00

2.91

1.01

.39

.46

.52/.49

-.21/-.20

Shame

3.69

.98

3.53

.97

.30

.24

.47

-.23/-.29

Prejudice

2.32

.82

2.40

.82

-.19

.01

-.20

.46

Notes
1. Coefficients on or below the diagonal in bold type are T1-T2 correlations (e.g., from T1
values of variables in column 1 to T2 values in variables in top row). Above the diagonal
are cross-sectional correlations at T1/T2.
2.

For rs in bold type, rs ≥ .19, p < .05; rs ≥ .24, p < .01; rs ≥ .30, p < .001. For rs in

light type (with larger df), all p < .001. All two tailed.

51

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Table 4
Study 3: Means of and inter-correlations among principal variables
Mean

SD

Guilt

Shame Reputation Appraisal Anger

Reparation

4.28

1.48

.57

.56

.57

.38

.49

Guilt

3.15

1.47

.68

.48

.33

.45

Shame

3.46

1.51

.61

.53

.44

Reputation

4.04

1.41

.59

.38

Appraisal

3.86

1.47

Anger

3.93

1.56

.29

All rs, p < .001

52

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Figure Caption
Figure 1. Shame moderating the longitudinal relationship between guilt and
reparation in Study 2

53

Collective guilt as a predictor of reparation

Low Shame

High shame

4.00

3.75

Reparation

3.50

3.25

3.00

2.75

2.50

Low Guilt

High Guilt

54

