Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2008, Vol. 94, No. 6, 1062–1077

Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.6.1062

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Conceptualizing and Assessing Self-Enhancement Bias:
A Componential Approach
Virginia S. Y. Kwan

Oliver P. John

Princeton University

University of California, Berkeley

Richard W. Robins

Lu Lu Kuang

University of California, Davis

Princeton University

Four studies implemented a componential approach to assessing self-enhancement and contrasted this
approach with 2 earlier ones: social comparison (comparing self-ratings with ratings of others) and
self-insight (comparing self-ratings with ratings by others). In Study 1, the authors varied the traits being
rated to identify conditions that lead to more or less similarity between approaches. In Study 2, the
authors examined the effects of acquaintance on the conditions identified in Study 1. In Study 3, the
authors showed that using rankings renders the self-insight approach equivalent to the component-based
approach but also has limitations in assessing self-enhancement. In Study 4, the authors compared the
social-comparison and the component-based approaches in terms of their psychological implications; the
relation between self-enhancement and adjustment depended on the self-enhancement approach used, and
the positive-adjustment correlates of the social-comparison approach disappeared when the confounding
influence of the target effect was controlled.
Keywords: self-enhancement, self-esteem, self-perception, mental health, and adjustment

ative (e.g., Block & Colvin, 1994; Colvin, Block, & Funder, 1995;
John & Robins, 1994; Shedler, Mayman, & Manis, 1993), or
mixed (e.g., Bonanno, Rennicke, & Dekel, 2005; Paulhus, 1998;
Robins & Beer, 2001) impact on mental health.
In an attempt to resolve this debate, Kwan, John, Kenny, Bond,
and Robins (2004) proposed that a componential approach holds
promise for understanding the divergent mental health correlates
of self-enhancement. They developed a componential approach
that extends Kenny’s (1994) Social Relations Model (SRM) from
its focus on interpersonal perception to self-perception. Their
theoretical derivation and empirical study illustrated that the two
traditional ways of operationalizing self-enhancement— comparing self-ratings to ratings of others or to ratings by others— have
limited utility because they each confound self-enhancement with
an unwanted component in interpersonal perception.
Building on Kwan et al.’s (2004) theoretical work, the present
research explored the implications of the componential approach
by documenting the conditions under which it converges and
diverges with the two traditional approaches to assessing selfenhancement and the conditions under which the different approaches are confounded by unwanted components of interpersonal perception.
Specifically, the present research sought to extend our understanding of the componential approach to self-enhancement in four
ways. First, we examined how the different conceptions of selfenhancement vary as a function of the trait domain being rated.
Like most research on self-enhancement, Kwan et al. (2004)
studied self-enhancement using socially desirable traits to form an
overall measure of self-enhancement. They keyed all traits in the
desirable direction, so that higher scores on the overall measure
indicated more self-enhancement. However, previous research has

A basic assumption about mental health is that psychological
adjustment requires the ability to accurately discern reality, particularly in relation to oneself. This assumption dates back to the
ancient Greeks and can be best summed up by the Socratic admonition to “know thyself.” In contrast to the longstanding view that
self-insight is necessary to function effectively, Taylor and Brown
(1988) argued that overly positive, self-enhancing illusions about
the self are the hallmark of mental health. This new perspective has
drawn considerable attention and has led to a protracted debate
between those who believe that psychologically healthy individuals perceive themselves accurately and those who believe that it is
more adaptive to have positive illusions. Subsequent research has
yielded divergent results, and it is unclear whether selfenhancement has a positive (e.g., Bonanno, Field, Kovacevic, &
Kaltman, 2002; Sedikides, Rudich, Gregg, Kumashiro, & Rusbult,
2004; Taylor, Lerner, Sherman, Sage, & McDowell, 2003), neg-

Virginia S. Y. Kwan and Lu Lu Kuang, Department of Psychology,
Princeton University; Oliver P. John, Department of Psychology and the
Institute of Personality and Social Research, University of California,
Berkeley; Richard W. Robins, Department of Psychology, University of
California, Davis.
This research was supported by National Science Foundation Research
Grant BCS-0541896 to Virginia S. Y. Kwan and Grant MH49255 from the
National Institutes of Mental Health to Oliver P. John; the support and
resources provided by the Institute of Personality and Social Research are
also gratefully acknowledged. We would like to thank Oliver Graudejus for
helpful comments on earlier versions of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Virginia
S. Y. Kwan, Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton,
NJ 08544-1010. E-mail: vkwan@princeton.edu
1062

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COMPONENTIAL APPROACH TO SELF-ENHANCEMENT

suggested that trait domain has an important influence on self–
other agreement (Funder & Dobroth, 1987; John & Robins, 1993),
as well as on the basic components of the SRM model (Kenny,
1994).
Second, we examined how the different conceptions of selfenhancement vary across judges. A valid accuracy criterion is
crucial in assessing self-enhancement bias. Previous research has
used accuracy criteria based on judgments by friends, clinicians,
and unacquainted observers. It is not clear whether the three
conceptions of self-enhancement show the same pattern of similarities and divergences across different types of judges.
Third, we examined alternative methods that may render the two
traditional conceptions of self-enhancement equivalent to the componential approach. Specifically, we evaluated the advantages and
disadvantages of a ranking procedure that has been used in some
previous studies of self-enhancement and two alternative ways of
computing the discrepancy between self-ratings and ratings of
others.
Finally, we explored the broader implications of the componential approach to self-enhancement by examining its relations with
measures of mental health and psychological adjustment. If the
componential approach has ecological validity, the measure of
self-enhancement that is derived from the componential approach
should predict important outcomes such as intrapsychic and interpersonal adjustment.

A Componential Approach to Self-Enhancement Bias
Kwan et al. (2004) found that two different conceptions of
self-enhancement coexist in the literature. One conception originated from Festinger’s (1954) social-comparison theory and compares perceptions of the self with perceptions of others: Selfenhancers are those individuals who perceive themselves more
positively than they perceive others. The other conception originated from Allport’s (1937) notion of self-insight and compares
self-perception with perceptions by others: Self-enhancers are individuals who perceive themselves more positively than they are
perceived by others.
Kwan et al. (2004) argued that each of these two conceptions
compares self-perception with an important criterion (perceptions
of others and perceptions by others); however, each conception is
incomplete without the other. The two previous conceptions are
different from each other, each confounding self-enhancement
with an irrelevant component of interpersonal perception.
Kwan et al. (2004) proposed that the SRM (Kenny, 1994) can be
extended to conceptualize self-perception as a form of interpersonal perception in which the same person, the self, is both the
perceiver and the target. That is, self-perception can be decomposed into three components: perceiver effect (Ps), target effect
(Ts), and relationship with the self (Rss). In equation form, the
self-perception on an attribute X is as follows: Xss ⫽ Perceivers ⫹
Targets ⫹ Relationshipss ⫹ Constants. Subscript ss indicates that
self is both perceiver and target.
In self-ratings, a high perceiver effect (Ps) implies a tendency to
evaluate people positively or leniently, whereas a low perceiver
effect implies a tendency to evaluate people negatively or harshly.
A high target effect (Ts) implies that the individual is perceived
positively by the consensus of others. A low target effect indicates
that the individual is generally perceived negatively by others.

1063

It follows from this model that individuals may perceive themselves positively because (a) they generally perceive people positively (high Ps), (b) they are perceived positively by others (high
Ts), and/or (c) they have an overly positive view of themselves
(high Rss). Individuals can score high on the social-comparison
index because they have an overly positive self-perception (Rss)
and/or because they are seen positively by others (i.e., a high target
effect). Individuals can score high on the self-insight index because they have an overly positive self-perception (Rss) and/or
because they generally see others positively (a high perceiver
effect). Thus, the social-comparison index confounds selfenhancement with the target effect, and the self-insight index
confounds self-enhancement with the perceiver effect.
Only Rss is specifically relevant to self-perception bias. Rss is
akin to the relationship effect in SRM and indicates the unique
component of self-perception that cannot be explained by perceiver and target effects. Rss is due to the unique relationship
individuals have with themselves and captures their own idiosyncratic view of themselves. Thus, Kwan et al. (2004) proposed that
Rss should be considered an unconfounded measure of selfenhancement bias.

Degree of Confounding
The social-comparison and self-insight indices are likely to be
confounded in most research contexts. The social-comparison index is the same as the SRM index (Rss) only when Ts equals
zero—that is, when individuals do not differ systematically on the
attributes being rated. This can also happen when individuals do
differ on an attribute but the perceivers fail to recognize these
differences. Thus, researchers should be cautious when interpreting an absence of target variance.
Similarly, the self-insight index is the same as the SRM index
only when Ps equals zero—that is, when individuals do not differ
in their general perception of others. This seems unlikely, given
that individual differences in the perceiver effect have been widely
demonstrated in studies of interpersonal perception (Kenny, 1994).
However, we know little about the conditions that lead to more
or less confounding. Therefore, the present research was designed
to address this issue. The roles of the target effect and perceiver
effect suggest that the confounding in the two previous indices
might be a function of the properties of the traits that are associated
with the perceiver and target variance. Previous research has
shown that each of the Big Five traits elicits different amounts of
target variance and perceiver variance (Kenny, 1994; Park & Judd,
1989). The amount of target variance reflects the degree to which
judges agree in the relative ordering of target persons on a trait
domain (i.e., interjudge agreement). The content domain of the
trait judged is found to be an important determinant of interjudge
agreement (John & Robins, 1993).
The mathematical derivations and the empirical illustration presented in Kwan et al. (2004) show clear conclusions about the
confounding problems of the social-comparison and self-insight
indices. The social-comparison index confounds self-enhancement
with the target effect, whereas the self-insight index confounds
self-enhancement with the perceiver effect. Thus, the degree of
confounding of the social-comparison index should vary as the
target variance varies. The degree of confounding of the selfinsight index should vary as the perceiver variance varies. How-

KWAN, JOHN, ROBINS, AND KUANG

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1064

ever, no empirical research has verified these conclusions. In order
to address this issue, we conducted an empirical study to illustrate
how the confounding of the two previous indices varies across
traits.
We expected to replicate past findings that extraversion traits
have more target variance than do agreeableness traits and that
agreeableness traits have more perceiver variance than do extraversion traits. If so, then the social-comparison index would show
little or no confounding for traits with low target variance and high
perceiver variance (e.g., Agreeableness) but more confounding for
traits with high target variance and low perceiver variance (e.g.,
Extraversion). In contrast, the self-insight index confounds selfenhancement with the perceiver effect, not the target effect. Then,
the self-insight index would show little confounding for traits with
high target variance and low perceiver variance (e.g., Extraversion) but more confounding for traits with low target variance and
high perceiver variance (e.g., Agreeableness).

Effect of Acquaintance
What effect does level of acquaintance have on the assessment
of self-enhancement? A surprising finding in the literature is that
the amount of consensus (target variance) in interpersonal judgments does not increase with greater acquaintance (Kenny, Albright, Malloy, & Kashy, 1994; Park, Kraus, & Ryan, 1997;
Paulhus & Reynolds, 1995).
According to Kenny’s (2004) PERSON model, as more behaviors are observed through increasing acquaintance, stereotypes or
shared assumptions that perceivers have decline. The other element of social perception that declines is the unique meaning that
perceivers give to a behavior. Once perceivers observe an individual’s pattern of behaviors for a longer period of time, atypical
behaviors have less weight in interpersonal perception. More opportunities to observe the personality of an individual are accompanied by a decrease in shared assumptions and unique meanings
of atypical behaviors that perceivers have about the individual.
Additionally, acquaintance does not improve consensual accuracy.
Kenny (2004) concluded from his model that “advantages of
acquaintance come very early in the acquaintance process . . .
accuracy requires relatively little acquaintance and extremely
long-term acquaintance confers no special advantage” (p. 272).
If Kenny (2004) is right, then the degree of confounding for the
social-comparison index with the target effect would remain at a
similar level regardless of whether the self-enhancement measure
is derived from judgments by long-term or short-term acquaintances. Consequently, the relation between the social-comparison
index and the SRM index in long-term relationships would be
conserved for short-term relationships.
How about the effects of acquaintance on the amount of perceiver variance? Previous research shows that perceiver variance
declines as a function of acquaintance (Kenny, 1994). That is,
people are less likely to rely on their general attributional style to
judge others whom they know well. Therefore, we expected that
there would be less confounding in the self-insight index, and the
relation between the self-insight index and the SRM index would
be stronger in long-term relationships than has been found in
short-term relationships.

Alternative Methods to Eliminate Confounding
Most research on self-enhancement has used rating scales. Previous studies have demonstrated systematic individual differences
in scale usage (e.g., Couch & Keniston, 1960; Jackson, 1979;
Schuman & Presser, 1980; Soto, John, Gosling, & Potter, 2008).
John and Robins (1994; Robins & John, 1997a) used a ranking
response format to eliminate such potential differences in scale
usage. Because they wanted to compare self-perceptions of performance in a group task with peer and expert observer ratings, it
was necessary to address concerns about the phenomenon of
observer harshness (see J. D. Campbell & Fehr, 1990; Coyne &
Gotlib, 1983). That is, when self-ratings are more positive than
ratings by others, the discrepancy could reflect a self-enhancement
tendency, but it could also reflect a tendency for judges to be
overly harsh in their ratings of targets. Conceptually, rankings
eliminate perceiver variance because they force all participants to
have the same mean rating. In SRM terms, observers are perceivers, and observer harshness is captured by the perceiver effect.
Consequently, a ranking procedure should eliminate the confounding of the self-insight index with the perceiver effect.
In the present research, we conducted an empirical study to
illustrate the utility of using a ranking procedure in a specific
research context. Specifically, we compared the three selfenhancement indices when they are based on rankings rather than
ratings. We expected to demonstrate that the ranking procedure
eliminates the confounding of the self-insight index with the
perceiver effect, rendering the self-insight index equivalent to the
SRM index.
Are there ways to operationalize the social-comparison index so
that it is equivalent to the SRM index? The social-comparison
index has been operationalized in two different ways in the literature: (a) the discrepancy between each participant’s self-rating
and the average of the individual ratings that the participant
assigned to the other group members and (b) a direct comparative
self-rating relative to a hypothetical average college student (e.g.,
Brown, 1986; Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995; Taylor et al., 2003). The
present research tested the convergence between these two conceptually similar but metrically different ways to operationalize
self-enhancement bias and the similarity between the SRM index
and the comparative self-rating.

Links Between Self-Enhancement and Adjustment
Finally, the present research explored a question of considerable
debate: How does self-enhancement bias relate to adjustment?
Kwan et al. (2004) found that the self-insight and socialcomparison indices differed from the SRM index in their associations with measures of adjustment. However, their findings were
based primarily on self-reported measures of adjustment. Selfreported measures of adjustment are problematic in this context
because individuals who self-enhance are also likely to provide
overly positive reports of their mental health (e.g., Colvin et al.,
1995; Shedler et al., 1993). Note that Kwan et al. did include one
nonself-report measure of adjustment—ratings of task performance by the same individuals whose ratings served as the basis
for the self-enhancement indices. Despite this, the observed correlations may be due in part to shared method variance. To better
understand the link between self-enhancement bias and adjust-

COMPONENTIAL APPROACH TO SELF-ENHANCEMENT

ment, we must examine adjustment as assessed from multiple
perspectives. Some objective and independent measures of adjustment are needed to understand the psychological implications of
self-enhancement.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Overview of Studies
We report four studies using the componential approach to
self-enhancement. In each study, we employed a round-robin
design in which participants interacted with 4 to 6 people in a
group and then rated their own behavior and the behavior of each
group member on a number of personality traits.
In Study 1, we varied the traits being rated to identify conditions
that lead to more or less confounding in the social-comparison and
self-insight indices of self-enhancement in a group context. We
expected that the patterns of the amount of target and perceiver
variance is similar to previous studies and thus the degree of
confounding in the social-comparison and self-insight indices
would vary depending on the Big Five trait domain.
In Study 2, we examined whether the conditions that lead to
confounding in previous measures of self-enhancement would
change as a function of acquaintance. Similar to Study 1, we
examined the extent to which previous self-enhancement indices
are confounded with the target and perceiver effects and identified
circumstances that lead to greater or lesser confoundings across a
set of traits. To examine whether levels of acquaintance affect the
conditions that lead to differences in confounding of the two
previous indices, we compared differences in findings between
Studies 1 and 2 (40-min vs. 3-month acquaintances, respectively).
In Study 3, we proposed an alternative way to control for the
confounding problems of the self-insight index by using a ranking
procedure. We aim to illustrate that the ranking procedure would
control for the confounding of the self-insight index with the
perceiver effect, making it equivalent to the SRM index of selfenhancement. Additionally, we examined the convergence between two conceptually similar but metrically different ways to
operationalize self-enhancement bias using the social-comparison
conception.
In Study 4, we differentiated the self-enhancement indices in
terms of their ability to predict implications for psychological
adjustment. Specifically, we examined multiple measures of adjustment as assessed by independent observers and objective indicators. We expected that a different pattern of adjustment correlates would emerge depending on which index of selfenhancement was used.

1065

After engaging in the group task, participants rated their own
behavior and the behavior of the other group members in a number
of trait domains. Based on previous research, we expected to
replicate the findings that traits related to Extraversion would elicit
the highest target variance, whereas traits related to Agreeableness
would elicit the lowest target variance, with traits related to the
other Big Five domains falling in between. Conversely, Extraversion traits would elicit the lowest perceiver variance and Agreeableness traits the highest perceiver variance. If so, then the
self-insight index would be more confounded for Agreeableness
traits than for Extraversion traits. In contrast, the socialcomparison index would be more confounded for Extraversion
traits than for Agreeableness traits.

Method
Participants
Data from two samples were used. In Sample 1, 112 undergraduate students (58% women) were randomly assigned to 28 groups
of 4. In Sample 2, 372 undergraduate students (55% women) were
randomly assigned to 72 groups of 5 and 3 groups of 4. Participants were recruited so that individuals in the same group were not
previously acquainted with each other.

Group Interaction Task
In Sample 1, participants took part in a simulation of a committee meeting in a large organization. Participants were told that
the purpose of the meeting was to allocate amounts from a fixed
bonus fund to four candidates nominated for a merit-based bonus.
Each participant was assigned the role of supervisor of one of the
candidates and was instructed to present a case for that candidate
at the meeting. Participants received a realistic written summary of
the employment backgrounds of all four candidates, including
salary, biographical information, and appraisals of their job performance. At the beginning of the meeting, participants gave 3- to
5-min presentations on the relative merits of their candidates. The
groups then had 30 min to reach a consensus on how to allocate the
bonus money.
Participants in Sample 2 interacted in a decision-making task
entitled Lost on the Moon. Participants were told that they were
members of a space crew originally scheduled to rendezvous with
a mother ship on the moon, but due to mechanical difficulties, the
ship was forced to land 200 miles away. Because the ship and
much of the equipment had been damaged, only 15 items were left
undamaged. Each group was instructed to consensually rank the
items in terms of their importance for the crew’s survival.

Study 1
To apply the componential approach to self-enhancement, we
must ensure that the target effect captures real individual differences. Study 1 utilized observer ratings of behavior in a group
interaction task. Although the observers (other group members)
were previously unacquainted with the targets, they had all the
relevant information needed to accurately judge their behavior in
this context. That is, the observers were being used as a criterion
for the target’s actual behavior in a specific, time-limited situation,
not as a measure of the truth about the target’s general personality
tendencies.

Measures
In Sample 1, participants rated their own behavior and the
behavior of the three other group members on three domains:
talkative, warm, and effective. Note that participants were not
asked to rate how talkative, warm, and effective the person was in
general but how talkative, warm, and effective the person was
during the interaction task. Being effective in this group discussion
task required participants to articulate and advocate one’s opinions
to a group of strangers. Thus, both talkative and effective were
included as markers of Extraversion. Similarly, “warm” was in-

KWAN, JOHN, ROBINS, AND KUANG

1066

cluded as a marker of Agreeableness. Ratings were made on a
9-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 9 (extremely).
In Sample 2, participants rated (a) one trait from the Extraversion domain (talkativeness), (b) two traits from the Agreeableness
domain (friendliness and competitiveness), and (c) three traits
from other Big Five domains (creativity, capacity for critical
thinking, and effort). Ratings were made on a 10-point scale
ranging from 1 (not at all) to 10 (extremely).

Results and Discussion

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

We report our findings from Sample 1 and Sample 2 together,
facilitating our examination of the effects of trait domain.

trait domain as the factor (i.e., Agreeableness, Other, and Extraversion), F(2, 8) ⫽ 13.77, p ⬍ .01.
Relative target variance ranged from .05 for competitiveness
(Agreeableness domain) to .60 for talkative (Extraversion domain). In contrast to the findings with perceiver variance, Extraversion traits elicited the highest target variance, whereas Agreeableness traits elicited the lowest target variance, with the other
traits falling in between, F(2, 8) ⫽ 28.31, p ⬍ .01. These findings
show that perceivers were more likely to agree in their ratings of
traits related to Extraversion.
Across two samples, a consistent pattern emerged: Extraversion
traits elicited the highest target variance and the lowest perceiver
variance, whereas Agreeableness traits elicited the lowest target
variance and the highest perceiver variance.

Variance Partitioning
For the ease of comparison across traits, results are reported in
terms of the relative variance; that is, any one variance component
is divided by the sum of the total variance, and thus the sum of
relative perceiver variance, relative target variance, and relative
relationship variance always equals 1. Additional evidence for the
robustness of the findings was gathered by examining the absolute
variance of the SRM components. We reran all of the analyses
based on the absolute variance rather than relative variance. The
pattern of significant findings was identical to those based on the
relative variance.
Relative perceiver variance ranged from .04 for talkative (Extraversion domain) to .60 for competitiveness (Agreeableness domain; see Table 1). Consistent with previous studies, Agreeableness traits elicited the highest perceiver variance, whereas
Extraversion traits elicited the lowest perceiver variance, with the
other traits falling in between. These differences among the traits
were significant, as shown by a one-way factorial ANOVA with

Self-Enhancement Indices
For each trait, we computed a social-comparison index, selfinsight index, and SRM index. To compute the social-comparison
index, we averaged the ratings each participant gave to the other
group members and subtracted this averaged rating from the selfrating. To compute the self-insight index, we averaged the ratings
each participant received from the other group members; we then
subtracted this perception-by-others rating from the self-rating. To
compute the SRM index, we subtracted the target effect and the
perceiver effect from the self-rating.
Averaged across all nine traits, the social-comparison index and
the self-insight index correlated .56, and the social-comparison
index and the self-insight index correlated .47 and .57 with the
SRM index. Given that all these indices share the same selfratings, these correlations indicate only modest similarity. In other
words, there were substantial differences among the three indices:

Table 1
Correlations Among Self-Enhancement Indices and Social Relations Model (SRM) Components for Each of the Nine Traits (Study 1)
Variance components
Trait
Extraversion traits
Talkative*
Talkativeness
Effective*
M
Other traits
Creativity
Critical thinking
Effort
M
Agreeableness traits
Friendliness
Competitiveness
Warm*
M

Correlations with the socialcomparison index

Correlations with the selfinsight index

Correlations with the
SRM index

Perceiver
variance

Target
variance

Target
effect

Perceiver
effect

SRM
SE

Target
effect

Perceiver
effect

SRM
SE

Target
effect

Perceiver
effect

.04 (0.18)
.20 (1.34)
.02 (0.10)
.09 (0.54)

.60 (2.54)
.43 (2.82)
.50 (2.43)
.51 (2.60)

.67
.61
.60
.63

⫺.36
⫺.22
⫺.37
⫺.32

.33
.28
.34
.32

⫺.39
⫺.17
⫺.37
⫺.31

.17
.56
.09
.29

.67
.57
.59
.61

⫺.38
⫺.46
⫺.42
⫺.42

⫺.49
⫺.16
⫺.61
⫺.44

.22 (1.21)
.33 (1.92)
.41 (2.35)
.32 (1.83)

.28 (1.51)
.25 (1.45)
.23 (1.31)
.25 (1.42)

.46
.45
.52
.48

⫺.36
⫺.28
⫺.19
⫺.28

.53
.50
.36
.47

⫺.38
⫺.41
⫺.30
⫺.36

.43
.60
.68
.58

.60
.64
.48
.58

⫺.38
⫺.40
⫺.50
⫺.43

⫺.33
⫺.10
⫺.21
⫺.22

.46 (2.66)
.60 (3.77)
.42 (1.60)
.49 (2.68)

.17 (0.96)
.05 (0.34)
.16 (0.59)
.13 (0.63)

.34
.08
.04
.16

⫺.30
⫺.26
⫺.35
⫺.30

.53
.67
.61
.61

⫺.38
⫺.31
⫺.47
⫺.39

.65
.71
.51
.63

.49
.42
.60
.51

⫺.52
⫺.60
⫺.67
⫺.60

⫺.25
⫺.24
⫺.30
⫺.26

Note. N ⫽ 112 for Sample 1, N ⫽ 372 for Sample 2. The asterisk indicates that the trait is from Sample 1; otherwise, it is from Sample 2. SRM SE denotes
the SRM index of self-enhancement. The correlations are Pearson correlation coefficients. Means were computed using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation. All
computations involved the SRM estimates controlled for group differences. Under variance components, relative variances are indicated outside the
parentheses and absolute variances are located within parentheses.

COMPONENTIAL APPROACH TO SELF-ENHANCEMENT

A person may appear self-enhancing on one index but not on the
others. What factors are responsible for these differences?

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Effect of Trait Domain on Degree of Confounding
Table 1 shows that the social-comparison index was positively
correlated with the target effect for all nine traits; the mean
correlation was .44, ranging from .04 for warm (Agreeableness
domain) to .67 for talkative (Extraversion domain). That is, individuals with a high target effect (i.e., those seen more positively by
others) tended to score high on the social-comparison index, thus
being classified erroneously as self-enhancers. Conversely, the
self-insight index was positively correlated with the perceiver
effect for all nine traits; these correlations averaged .51, ranging
from .09 for effective (Extraversion) to .71 for competitiveness
(low Agreeableness). That is, individuals with a high perceiver
effect (i.e., those who see others more positively) tended to score
high on the self-insight index, thus being classified erroneously as
self-enhancers.1
Although the two indices showed some degree of confounding
for all traits, the extent of confounding varied across traits. The
confounding between the social-comparison index and the target
effect was most pronounced for the Extraversion traits and least
pronounced for the Agreeableness traits. Conversely, the confounding between the self-insight index and the perceiver effect
was most pronounced for the Agreeableness traits and least pronounced for the Extraversion traits. These findings generalized to
all traits in the two different samples.
To further explore the effects of trait domain, we computed
correlations across the nine traits, relating the amount of perceiver
and target variance for each trait to the confounding correlations.
The results were very clear: (a) The degree to which the socialcomparison index was confounded with the target effect was
strongly related to the degree to which the trait had high target
variance (r ⫽ .90); (b) The degree to which the self-insight index
was confounded with the perceiver effect was strongly related to
the degree to which the trait had high perceiver variance (r ⫽ .90);
(c) The social-comparison index was less similar to the SRM index
for traits that had high target variance (r ⫽ ⫺.88); and (d) The
self-insight index was less similar to the SRM index for traits that
had high perceiver variance (r ⫽ ⫺.61).

Summary of Findings
Study 1 showed that the social-comparison and self-insight
indices are confounded with other components of social perception. The social-comparison index was confounded with the target
effect, whereas the self-insight index was confounded with the
perceiver effect. However, we also identified circumstances that
lead to greater or lesser confounding. Specifically, the confounding was greater for the social-comparison index when the target
variance was high and greater for the self-insight index when the
perceiver variance was high. We also found effects for Big Five
content domain. The social-comparison index showed little or no
confounding for Agreeableness traits but more substantial confounding for Extraversion traits. Conversely, the self-insight index
showed little confounding for Extraversion traits but more substantial confounding for Agreeableness traits.

1067

Limitations
Study 1 shows the extent to which the self-enhancement indices
are confounded by varying levels of perceiver and target variance
across the Big Five traits. However, it is important to keep in mind
that the participants did not make general trait ratings but rather
rated targets on a set of dimensions that have a specific meaning in
the particular interaction context. For example, in the bonus allocation task, being effective required participants to articulate and
advocate their opinion to a group of strangers. Effectiveness in this
context may be a good indicator of one’s talkativeness, assertiveness, and social skills. Thus, we included effectiveness as a marker
of extraversion. Further, in the Lost on the Moon task used in
Sample 2, being competitive did not necessarily require hurting
others in general (low agreeableness; see Hofstee, deRaad, &
Goldberg, 1992), but the goal of the task for participants in Sample
2 was to reach a group consensus. Thus, in this context, being
competitive may be the opposite of being cooperative. When
people are competitive, their main goal is to further themselves. In
contrast, a goal of being agreeable is to appease others. Compet1
Note that for both conceptual and mathematical reasons, we expected
to find a negative correlation between the social-comparison index and the
perceiver effect and also find a negative correlation between the selfinsight index and the target effect. According to the social-comparison
approach, self-enhancement is the discrepancy between how I see myself
and how I see others (i.e., the discrepancy between self-perceptions and the
perceptions of others, similar to the perceiver effect in SRM terms). Thus,
the more negatively I see others, the more likely I am to self-enhance.
According to the self-insight approach, self-enhancement is the discrepancy between how I see myself and the social consensus about me (i.e., the
discrepancy between self-perceptions and the perceptions by others, similar
to the target effect in SRM terms). Thus, the more highly others see me, the
less likely I am to self-enhance. Consistent with these conceptualizations,
we found a negative correlation between the social-comparison index and
the perceiver effect and between the self-insight index and the target effect.
These negative correlations are expected because the social comparison
and self-insight indices include one’s actual standing and general positivity
in person perception, respectively, as the criteria for assessing selfenhancement.
The correlations for the SRM index should also be negative with the
perceiver effect and with the target effects. The componential approach
combines the virtues from the social-comparison and the self-insight approaches, taking into account both perceiver and target effects in measuring
self-enhancement. Similar to these previous approaches, the SRM index of
self-enhancement was defined as the discrepancy between self-perceptions
and the sum of the perceptions of others (the perceiver effect) and the
perceptions by others (the target effect). Therefore, the scores on the SRM
index of self-enhancement would be negatively correlated with the perceiver effect as well as the target effect.
The correlations of the SRM index with both the perceiver and the target
effects are similar to those of the two previous indices. As seen in Tables
1 and 2, the correlations for individual trait items are sometimes slightly
higher for the two previous indices of self-enhancement and sometimes
higher for the SRM index, but overall they are quite similar. The mean of
the correlations between the social-comparison index and the perceiver
effect was ⫺.30 for Study 1 and ⫺.49 for Study 2, which was similar to the
correlation between SRM and perceiver effects (⫺.31 for Study 1 and ⫺.40
for Study 2). The mean of the correlations between the self-insight index
and the target effect was ⫺.36 for Study 1 and ⫺.50 for Study 2, which was
similar to the correlation between the SRM index of self-enhancement and
the target effect (⫺.49 for Study 1 and ⫺.43 for Study 2).

KWAN, JOHN, ROBINS, AND KUANG

1068

itiveness and agreeableness may thus stand in contrast to one
another. Some evidence of this contrast is found in the NEO
Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R; Costa & McCrae, 1992), which
includes items such as “I would rather cooperate with others than
compete with them” as a marker of agreeableness. Nonetheless,
because the dimensions rated in Study 1 were not selected to
comprehensively assess Extraversion and Agreeableness, readers
should be cautious when interpreting the results associated with
our trait classification until further evidence is presented. We will
present further evidence of the extent to which the confounding of
different self indices varies across the Big Five traits in Study 2.

important that each of the traits represented only one of the Big
Five traits. Most of the original 32 traits do not fall neatly into one
of the Big Five dimensions. Therefore, following John’s (1990)
Big Five prototypes, two of the authors independently identified
traits that each reflected only one of the Big Five personality
dimensions, and 15 traits were consensually regarded to meet this
criterion. Thus, to examine the effect of trait domain on the
similarities between different conceptions, we examined three
markers of each of the Big Five dimensions (see Table 2). Personality traits were presented in a randomized order, with half of
the positive poles on the right side and the other half of the positive
poles on the left side, with a 7-point rating scale in between.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 2
Study 1 identified conditions that lead to more or less confounding in each of the two traditional indices of self-enhancement.
These findings provide insight into when the use of each of the two
traditional conceptions of self-enhancement is more or less problematic, thus guiding researchers in the design of their studies.
However, Study 1 derived the indices of self-enhancement on the
basis of judgments of brief-interaction partners. Would the conditions that lead to confounding in previous measures of selfenhancement change as the level of acquaintance goes up? Study
2 addresses this question by replicating the findings of Study 1
using personality ratings obtained from long-term acquaintances.
Following Study 1, we examined the extent to which various
self-enhancement indices are confounded with the target and perceiver effects and the circumstances that lead to greater or lesser
confounding across traits. In addition, by comparing the findings
from Studies 1 and 2, we were able to examine the effects of
acquaintance on the different measures of self-enhancement.

Method
Participants
We reanalyzed Kwan et al.’s (2004) data obtained from 128
undergraduate students (98 females and 30 males). Their ages
ranged from 19 to 22 years, with a mean of 21. The responses of
these participants also provided the basis for the article by Kwan
et al. (2004). In their article, they focused on an overall index of
self-enhancement but did not examine the issue with which we are
concerned here: How the confounding of the two previous indices
of self-enhancement varies across traits.

Experimental Design
We used a round-robin design. In all, there were 24 groups with
5 members and 2 groups with 4 members. To ensure that participants were sufficiently familiar with each other to make personality judgments, we required them to complete three group assignments with their group members over the course of the semester.
That is, each group met for at least 1 hr per week outside the
classroom. Personality ratings were obtained after the groups had
worked together for 3 months. Each participant rated the personality of all other group members and provided a self-rating.
Kwan et al. (2004) included 32 desirable and undesirable traits.
The present study aimed to examine whether the degree of confounding in the two previous indices would vary depending on the
Big Five trait domains. For the purpose of this study, it was thus

Results and Discussion
We computed the three indices of self-enhancement described in
Study 1 separately for each of the 15 traits (i.e., 15 socialcomparison indices, 15 self-insight indices, and 15 SRM indices).

Variance Partitioning
Similar to Study 1, perceivers showed the highest consensus in
judging Extraversion traits and the lowest consensus in judging
Agreeableness traits. Specifically, the mean relative perceiver variance for the three trait categories ranged from .04 for Extraversion
traits to .32 for Agreeableness traits, and the mean relative target
variance ranged from .14 for Agreeableness traits to .50 for Extraversion traits (see Table 2). Overall, we found further support
for our previous findings that Extraversion traits elicited the highest target variance but the lowest perceiver variance, whereas
Agreeableness traits elicited the lowest target variance but the
highest perceiver variance.

Effects of Acquaintance on Confounding
We examined how similar these three self-enhancement indices
are to each other and also compared the present findings with those
found in Study 1. We correlated the three self-enhancement indices
separately for each of the 15 traits. The mean correlations were
computed using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation. On average, the
social-comparison index was positively correlated with the target
effect as in Study 1 (.44 vs. .32), and the social-comparison index
and the target effect were correlated to the same degree in both
studies, z ⫽ 1.07, p ⬎ .05. The patterns in differences in these
correlations between Studies 1 and 2 are also similar to the overall
mean r, across trait domains. For Extraversion traits, the socialcomparison index was positively correlated with the target effect,
with mean r ⫽ .63 in Study 1 and .53 in Study 2. For Agreeableness, these correlations were .16 in Study 1 and .11 in Study 2.
Additionally, the correlations between the social-comparison
index and the SRM index were similar in both studies (.47 vs .64),
z ⫽ 1.89, p ⬎ .05. Given that the extent of confounding of the
social-comparison index with the target effect was similar in both
studies, the correlations between the social-comparison index and
the SRM index remained similar. These correlations between
Studies 1 and 2 were also similar across trait domains: For Extraversion traits, the social-comparison index was positively correlated with the SRM, with mean r ⫽ .32 in Study 1 and .44 in Study

COMPONENTIAL APPROACH TO SELF-ENHANCEMENT

1069

Table 2
Correlations Among Self-Enhancement Indices and Social Relations Model (SRM) Components for Each of the 15 Big Five Traits
(Study 2)
Variance components

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Bipolar trait
Extraversion
3. Extraverted
11. Talkative
13. Sociable
M
Conscientiousness
4. Diligent
21. Careful
30. Cautious
M
Emotional stability
2. Unworried
5. Relaxed
9. Carefree
M
Openness
1. Eager to change the
status quo
14. Prefer novel ways
19. Prefer variety
M
Agreeableness
20. Unselfish
25. Kind
28. Generous
M

Correlations with the socialcomparison index

Correlations with the selfinsight index

Correlations with
the SRM index

Perceiver
variance

Target
variance

Target
effect

Perceiver
effect

SRM
SE

Target
effect

Perceiver
effect

SRM
SE

Target
effect

Perceiver
effect

.05 (0.11)
.06 (0.13)
.02 (0.05)
.04 (0.10)

.50 (1.16)
.60 (1.36)
.41 (0.77)
.50 (1.10)

.54
.53
.52
.53

⫺.37
⫺.36
⫺.46
⫺.40

.45
.36
.51
.44

⫺.38
⫺.45
⫺.46
⫺.43

.09
.16
.26
.17

.79
.83
.80
.81

⫺.39
⫺.50
⫺.35
⫺.42

⫺.45
⫺.34
⫺.26
⫺.35

.14 (0.23)
.12 (0.20)
.19 (0.26)
.15 (0.23)

.31 (0.51)
.26 (0.43)
.28 (0.37)
.28 (0.44)

.26
.19
.16
.20

⫺.45
⫺.58
⫺.52
⫺.52

.65
.72
.68
.68

⫺.48
⫺.57
⫺.57
⫺.54

.13
.03
.14
.10

.76
.79
.77
.77

⫺.44
⫺.43
⫺.52
⫺.46

⫺.41
⫺.48
⫺.44
⫺.44

.02 (0.04)
.09 (0.17)
.10 (0.16)
.07 (0.12)

.26 (0.55)
.29 (0.57)
.30 (0.46)
.28 (0.53)

.44
.45
.34
.41

⫺.54
⫺.54
⫺.53
⫺.54

.61
.60
.65
.62

⫺.55
⫺.53
⫺.53
⫺.54

.25
.29
.17
.23

.80
.77
.78
.78

⫺.35
⫺.37
⫺.40
⫺.37

⫺.29
⫺.34
⫺.40
⫺.34

.09 (1.90)

.33 (0.71)

.25

⫺.52

.59

⫺.61

.19

.82

⫺.56

⫺.36

.07 (0.13)
.08 (0.11)
.08 (0.71)

.30 (0.51)
.33 (0.47)
.32 (0.56)

.36
.26
.29

⫺.50
⫺.52
⫺.51

.63
.68
.63

⫺.49
⫺.54
⫺.55

.13
.04
.12

.78
.83
.81

⫺.40
⫺.40
⫺.46

⫺.44
⫺.41
⫺.40

.37 (0.61)
.23 (0.25)
.37 (0.34)
.32 (0.40)

.15 (0.25)
.20 (0.21)
.08 (0.07)
.14 (0.18)

.00
.19
.15
.11

⫺.52
⫺.38
⫺.55
⫺.49

.79
.66
.83
.77

⫺.48
⫺.47
⫺.43
⫺.46

.16
.33
.25
.25

.65
.69
.63
.66

⫺.51
⫺.47
⫺.26
⫺.42

⫺.54
⫺.30
⫺.43
⫺.43

Note. N ⫽ 128. SRM SE denotes the SRM index of self-enhancement. The correlations are Pearson correlation coefficients. Means were computed using
Fisher’s r-to-z transformation. All computations involved the SRM estimates controlled for group differences. Under variance components, relative
variances are indicated outside the parentheses and absolute variances are located within parentheses.

2. For Agreeableness, these correlations were .61 in Study 1 and
.77 in Study 2.
Also as in Study 1, the self-insight index was positively and
significantly correlated with the perceiver effect (r ⫽ .18, p ⬍ .05).
However, this correlation between self-insight index and the perceiver effect was significantly lower in Study 2 than in Study 1
(.18 vs. .51), z ⫽ 2.91, p ⬍ .01. The difference in correlations
between the self-insight index and perceiver effect was particularly
pronounced for Agreeableness traits among these long-term acquaintances in Study 2. For Agreeableness traits, the mean correlations between the self-insight index and the perceiver effect were
.63 in Study 1 and .25 in Study 2, whereas these correlations for
Extraversion traits were .29 in Study 1 and .17 in Study 2.
The correlation between the self-insight index and the SRM
index was .77 in Study 2, which was significantly greater than that
found in Study 1 (.57), z ⫽ 2.84, p ⬍ .01. The patterns in
differences in these correlations were also similar across trait
domains. For Extraversion traits, the self-insight index was positively correlated with the SRM, with mean r ⫽ .61 in Study 1 and
.81 in Study 2. For Agreeableness, these correlations were .51 in
Study 1 and .66 in Study 2.
The participants in the present study knew each other much
better than the participants in Study 1 (3 months vs. 40 min). The
increase in the level of acquaintance might have led to less reliance

on the perceiver’s general view of people and thus resulted in less
confounding between the self-insight index and the perceiver
effect than was found in Study 1. The correlation between the
social-comparison index and the self-insight index was .65, which
was not significantly different from their correlations in Study 1
(.56), z ⫽ 1.09, p ⬎ .05. For Extraversion traits, the socialcomparison index was positively correlated with the self-insight
index, with mean r ⫽ .65 in Study 1 and .55 in Study 2. For
Agreeableness, these correlations were .53 in Study 1 and .71 in
Study 2. Given that the correlation between the social-comparison
and the self-insight indices was due to sharing a common part of
the self-rating and did not relate to the degree of confounding with
the target and perceiver effects, the correlation of these two indices
remained similar as in Study 1.
Overall, Study 2 replicated the finding that the socialcomparison index is confounded with the target effect and the
self-insight index is confounded with the perceiver effect. Thus,
regardless of whether the self-enhancement index is based on
stranger ratings of situation-specific behavior or acquaintance ratings of general personality traits, the two traditional measures of
self-enhancement show the same pattern of confounding. The
major difference between acquainted and unacquainted perceivers
is that the self-insight index is less confounded with the perceiver
effect for acquainted perceivers. It should be noted that we did not

KWAN, JOHN, ROBINS, AND KUANG

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1070

experimentally manipulate levels of acquaintance. Thus, the observed difference may be caused by the difference in acquaintanceship across these two samples or other variables. Future studies
could address this limitation by using a longitudinal design to
examine the causal direction between acquaintanceship and the
degree of confounding across measures of self-enhancement.

own performance and the performance of each of the group members. In addition, participants were asked to complete a comparative self-rating of their performance in the group interaction task,
specifically to compare their performance with that of an “average” MBA student using a 9-point scale ranging from 1 (much
worse) to 4 (about the same as average) to 9 (much better).

Study 3

Results and Discussion

The findings of Studies 1 and 2 attest to the confounding
problems associated with the self-insight and social-comparison
indices of self-enhancement. Nevertheless, some researchers may
not be able to adopt the full SRM approach to measure selfenhancement and would like to explore briefer alternatives. How
well do such approaches perform? Could they eliminate the confounding we have demonstrated in the traditional conceptions?
In Study 3, therefore, we used a ranking procedure to illustrate
that it is possible to eliminate perceiver variance by forcing all
participants to have the same mean rating in their social-perception
ratings. Consequently, the ranking procedure should also eliminate
the confounding of the self-insight index with the perceiver effect
(which becomes a constant in this case). To illustrate the effectiveness of the ranking procedure, the first goal of Study 3 was to
compare the three self-enhancement indices with each other when
they are based on rankings rather than ratings.
The second goal of Study 3 was to examine the comparative
self-rating approach, a newer and simplified version of the social
comparison index (e.g., Klar & Giladi, 1997, 1999; Taylor &
Gollwitzer, 1995; Taylor et al., 2003). This measure is appealing
for its simplicity and brevity. Studies 1 and 2 operationalized the
social-comparison index as the discrepancy between each participant’s self-rating and the average of the individual ratings that the
participant assigned to the other group members. In contrast, the
comparative self-rating does not ask the participant to make separate ratings of self and others for social comparison (or an
“average other”; cf. Brown, 1986). Instead, this index consists of
a self-rating with the explicit instruction to compare oneself with
a relevant average other (such as the average college student) and
to rate oneself on a continuum ranging from much lower to the
same to much higher.
Although this abbreviated comparative self-measure is conceptually similar to the explicit social-comparison index (because both
entail comparing self-ratings with ratings of others), we know little
about (a) whether the comparative-self index is equivalent to the
earlier measure, (b) whether it is less (or more) confounded with
the target effect, and (c) how it is related to the SRM selfenhancement index. The answers to these three questions are
important for the field because the comparative-self index has
become a widely adopted measure of self-enhancement without
much psychometric scrutiny.

Method
A new sample of 126 students (53% women) in a master of
business administration (MBA) program took part in a group
decision-making task similar to the one described for Sample 1 in
Study 1, namely a simulation of a bonus committee meeting.
Participants were randomly assigned to groups of 6. Following the
group discussion, participants ranked the effectiveness of their

Self-Enhancement Indices
As in Studies 1 and 2, we computed social-comparison, selfinsight, and SRM-based self-enhancement indices. In addition to
these three indices, we used the comparative-self index, which has
been used as an abbreviated version of the social-comparison
index of self-enhancement.
We intercorrelated these four self-enhancement indices to examine how similar they are to each other. First, reassuringly, the
social-comparison index and the comparative-self measure were
correlated substantially (r ⫽ .71, p ⬍ .05). Thus, asking participants to directly compare their performance with that of an average
person was quite similar to the social-comparison index in which
independent self-perceptions are compared with perceptions of
several specific others. Although these two self-enhancement indices were operationalized in quite different ways, empirically
they were quite similar.
Second, both the social-comparison index and the comparativeself measure were positively correlated with the target effect (rs ⫽
.44 and .39, respectively; ps ⬍ .001). Although the comparativeself measure was operationalized in different ways than the socialcomparison index, they are confounded with the target effect to a
very similar degree.
Third, the social-comparison index and the comparative-self
measure were only moderately correlated with the SRM index (r ⫽
.47 and r ⫽ .26, respectively; both ps ⬍ .05). This suggests that
SRM index was related to but distinct from the social-comparison
index and comparative-self measure.
What about the ranking procedure? The self-insight index, when
derived from ranking data, was perfectly correlated (except for
rounding errors) with the SRM index (r ⫽ .99, p ⬍ .01). This
finding shows that the ranking procedure fully controls for the
confounding problems of the self-insight index with the perceiver
effect and makes it equivalent to the SRM index. Thus, in some
contexts, researchers could use the ranking procedure to eliminate
the confounding of the self-insight index with the perceiver effect.
Despite this, ranking procedures have limitations in the study of
self-enhancement. The ranking procedure does not allow for ties;
participants are forced to assign a different ranking to each target.
Furthermore, the ranking procedure is not ideal for assessing
self-enhancement among high performers and self-effacement
among low performers. For example, people would rank selfenhancers with good performance in the group highly, and selfenhancers would also rank themselves highly. With little discrepancy between self-rankings by self-enhancers and other’s rankings
of them, self-enhancement would become difficult to detect empirically. An absence of discrepancy cannot, therefore, rule out the
possibility that the self-enhancers see themselves overly positively.
In principle, both ranking and rating procedures are not perfect
for capturing self-enhancement among high performers or self-

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COMPONENTIAL APPROACH TO SELF-ENHANCEMENT

effacement among low performers. However, this may be less of a
problem for rating than for ranking procedures. Consider Alice and
her group members as an example: Alice is the best performer in
the group, but her performance is not perfect. When using a
ranking procedure, Alice’s group members would rank her “1” and
Alice would also rank herself “1.” There would be no discrepancy
between Alice’s self-ranking and others’ ranking of Alice, suggesting that Alice shows no self-enhancement. In contrast, when
using a rating procedure, Alice’s group members would rate her
“8” and Alice would rate herself “10.” So, there would be a
negative discrepancy between others’ ratings of Alice and her
self-rating, suggesting that Alice shows self-enhancement bias.
Similar logic applies to self-effacers with poor performance. Future studies should empirically examine the advantages and disadvantages of rating or ranking procedures in research on selfenhancement.2

Study 4
What happens when you self-enhance in a group performance
task, like those participants in Study 3? Further, what are the
personality characteristics of those self-enhancers? Research on
self-enhancement in the performance or ability domain has yielded
divergent results, despite having received considerable attention in
the literature. It is still unclear whether self-enhancement in the
ability or performance domain has a positive, negative, or mixed
impact on adjustment. For example, self-enhancement has been
related to lower levels of career success (e.g., Bass & Yammarino,
1991) and lower skill levels (e.g., Kruger & Dunning, 1999) but
has also been shown to be positively related to mental health and
negatively related to mental distress (Taylor et al., 2003), as well
as positively to interpersonal adaptiveness during initial encounters (Paulhus, 1998).
As in most research on self-enhancement, whether using the
social-comparison approach, the self-insight approach, or the componential approach, self-enhancement is here defined in relative
terms, namely as the difference between a self-evaluation and an
accuracy criterion (or criteria). On the basis of this definition, in
the case of performance evaluations, self-enhancement tends to be
positively correlated with positive self-evaluations and negatively
correlated with the accuracy criterion (e.g., performance). In other
words, the more positively individuals see themselves, the more
likely they are self-enhancing; the less merit they have, the more
likely they are self-enhancing. This brings up the question of
whether self-enhancers are not skillful or measures of selfenhancement are not independent of performance level.
It is important to note that the componential approach enables us
to unconfound the unwanted components of interpersonal perceptions (e.g., individual differences in performance, aka the target
effect in SRM terms); however, that does not necessarily mean that
the SRM index of self-enhancement and the target effect are
uncorrelated. Therefore, we aim to examine the unique effect of
self-enhancement that is statistically independent of performance
when examining its link with adjustment (i.e., when preexisting
performance differences are equalized). The componential approach provides great flexibility to address such issues; specifically, one can statistically remove the negative correlation with
performance from the SRM index of self-enhancement (i.e., equat-

1071

ing the standing on the target effect) and then examine the external
correlates with this residual.
Therefore, a major goal of Study 4 was to examine whether
self-enhancement is positively or negatively related to adjustment.
Specifically, we examined whether overly positive self-evaluations
or poor performance predicts adjustment. Another major goal of
Study 4 was to examine whether different self-enhancement indices have distinct relations with adjustment. Specifically, Study 4
compared two indices of self-enhancement: the social-comparison
index and the SRM index. We excluded the self-insight index
because Study 3 showed that the self-insight index is identical to
the SRM index when rankings are used.
To achieve these goals, we conducted an extensive analysis of
the data collected by the MBA Assessment Project at the Institute
of Personality and Social Research. One strength of the MBA data
set is that adjustment was assessed using multiple data sources.
John and Robins (1994) examined the relation between selfenhancement bias and narcissism using a subset of the data from
this MBA project. They did not, however, examine how selfenhancement relates to more direct measures of psychological
adjustment, such as clinical-observer ratings of psychological
health, staff ratings of group performance, and objective indicators
of academic performance.
Another strength of the MBA Assessment Project that John and
Robins (1994) did not take full advantage of is the round-robin
design in examining self-enhancement. This design allows us to
derive the target effect and different indices of self-enhancement.
In this MBA project, measures of subsequent achievement and
psychological adjustment were independent assessments that do
not share any method variance with the SRM measures. This data
set thus allowed us to differentiate the target effect and the two
self-enhancement indices in terms of their implications for psychological health as defined by self-reports, independent observers, and objective performance criteria.
In addition to examining the relation between self-enhancement
and psychological adjustment, we also examined the relation between the target effect and adjustment. It is important to include
the target effect in our investigation because the social-comparison
index confounds self-enhancement with the target effect. Thus, a
better understanding of the link between the target effect and
adjustment would provide insight into the large body of research
on the link between the social-comparison index and adjustment.
To recapitulate, Study 4 sought to address four questions. Our
first question was: What characteristics are associated with individuals who performed well in group contexts? Within the componential approach, we operationalized levels of performance as
the social consensus by the group members (i.e., the target effect
in SRM terms). We expected that the target effect itself would
have substantive psychological meaning and be linked to important aspects of adjustment. Specifically, individuals who perform
2
In the present research, we did not examine ratings versus rankings on
the same attributes, so we are not able to empirically test whether the
ranking procedure is more of a problem in distinguishing self-enhancement
among high and low performers. The correlations between selfenhancement and target effect were slightly higher for rankings of performance (Studies 3 and 4; mean r ⫽ ⫺.51) than for ratings of traits (Studies
1 and 2; mean r ⫽ ⫺.46).

KWAN, JOHN, ROBINS, AND KUANG

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1072

well in a group-interaction task (high-target effect) are likely to (a)
possess personality characteristics associated with being a “healthy
socially confident extravert,” (b) be regarded by others as resilient
and less defensive, and (c) receive higher grades in school.
However, we did not expect the target effect to be associated
with narcissism. That is, narcissists do not necessarily perform
better or worse in group interactions. In this group interaction,
narcissistic personality traits are a mixed blessing—they facilitate
assertive, task-oriented behaviors but without the interpersonal
sensitivity and empathy toward other group members required for
truly effective leadership (see Paulhus, 1998; W. K. Campbell,
Bush, Brunell, & Shelton, 2005).
Our second question was: Do different self-enhancement indices
show different relations with adjustment? We compared the patterns of adjustment correlates for two indices of self-enhancement:
the social-comparison index and the SRM index of selfenhancement. Based on previous research using the socialcomparison index, we expected that individuals with high scores
on the social-comparison index would possess some desirable
characteristics and little sign of maladjustment, replicating previous findings (Taylor & Brown, 1988; Taylor et al., 2003).
How about the SRM index of self-enhancement? Individuals
who score high on the SRM index are not effective group members
yet still see themselves overly positively in the group task—the
same pattern one would expect for narcissistic individuals. Thus,
we expected a positive association between the SRM index of
self-enhancement and narcissism. Following the same reasoning,
we predicted that individuals scoring high on the SRM index
would be seen by clinical observers as defensive and less resilient,
suggesting that self-enhancing individuals are not better adjusted
than individuals with more realistic appraisals of their ability.
Our third question was: Is the social-comparison index associated with psychological adjustment merely because it is confounded by the target effect? If the positive correlates between the
social-comparison index and adjustment disappear after controlling for confounding with the target effect, this pattern of findings
would provide a counter claim about the adaptive benefits of
self-enhancement based on the social-comparison index.
Our fourth question was: Do self-enhancers appear maladjusted
because of their relatively poorer performance? To test this, we
isolated the unique effect of self-enhancement from performance
when examining its link with adjustment. The answers to these
four questions will provide a better understanding and give insight
to the debate as to whether self-enhancement is good or bad for
different aspects of adjustment.

Method
We analyzed data obtained from 102 MBA students (45%
women) who participated in 17 groups of 6 members each. Participants took part in a group decision-making task similar to that
in Study 3 and then ranked their own performance and the performance of the other group members.3
As in Studies 1 through 3, we computed two indices of selfenhancement: the social-comparison index and the SRM index (we
excluded the self-insight index because Study 3 showed that it is
identical to the SRM index when rankings are used).
There were, however, two differences from Study 3. First, to
illustrate the confounding problem of the social-comparison index,

we compared the adjustment correlations of the (original) socialcomparison index with those for the unconfounded socialcomparison index. To compute the unconfounded socialcomparison index, we regressed the social-comparison index onto
the target effect and used the standardized residuals as the unconfounded social-comparison index. Second, to test whether the
adjustment effects are due solely to self-enhancement, performance deficits, or a combination of the two, we compared the
adjustment correlations of the SRM index with a partial index of
self-enhancement that did not include variance associated with the
target effect. Specifically, we regressed the SRM index of selfenhancement onto the target effect and used the standardized
residuals as a partial index of self-enhancement. This partial index
and the target effect were independent of each other, allowing us
to assess the external correlates of them separately.

Measures of Effective Performance
Each group interaction was observed by 11 staff assessors, each
of whom independently ranked the participants on three dimensions: initiative, energy, and oral communication skills. The rankings by the 11 assessors were averaged to yield a composite
measure of each dimension.

Measures of Adjustment
Ego-resiliency. The measure of ego-resiliency was obtained
from the clinical observer ratings of the California Adult Q-Set
(CAQ; Block, 1961, 1978). Participants interacted with a team of
trained psychologists for 2.5 days. Their activities ranged from
informal breakfasts and lunches with staff members to more structured tasks, such as managerial assessment exercises, interviews,
and a game of charades. At the end of the assessment weekend,
each participant was described using the 100-item CAQ by the five
psychologists who had the most intensive contact with that participant during the weekend. These five Q-sorts were averaged to
yield a composite personality description of each participant.
Using these composite Q-sorts, we scored a 26-item egoresiliency index for each participant (see Klohnen, 1996), which
included items such as “has warmth; has the capacity for close
relationships; compassionate.” Ego-resiliency is related to productive and autonomous activity, interpersonal warmth and insight,
and skilled expressiveness (Klohnen, 1996). In the present study,
3

Both ranking and rating procedures have limitations for capturing
self-enhancement among high performers and self-effacement among low
performers (ceiling and floor effects). Ideally, the measurement scale
would cover all possible values at both ends in order to eliminate floor and
ceiling effects. Practically, though, this may not be feasible. Researchers
should be vigilant regarding the trade-off between the length of the scale
and the potential for floor and ceiling effects. Like any existing method that
is derived from a rating scale with limits, the componential approach is not
immune to floor and ceiling effects. Nevertheless, the use of the componential approach may be reasonable when the levels of performance among
individuals within the sample are similar. The current sample comprises
MBA students from a highly selective business school, thus the levels of
performance across students are likely to be less variegated. We caution
researchers that use of a ranking procedure in combination with the
componential approach may be a less effective control for groups with
more variance between members.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COMPONENTIAL APPROACH TO SELF-ENHANCEMENT

the alpha coefficient of the observer-based ego-resiliency index
was .90.
Narcissism. Narcissism is a complex construct that has been
difficult to conceptualize and measure; previous research has examined subtypes of narcissism, such as overt and covert narcissism. Thus, we employed two different measures of narcissism. To
assess overt narcissism, we used the Narcissistic Personality Inventory (NPI; Raskin & Terry, 1988). The NPI was designed for
nonclinical populations and is the most widely used and thoroughly researched measure of narcissism (␣ reliability ⫽ .79 in
this sample). To assess covert narcissism, we used Wink’s (1991)
hypersensitivity scale. The hypersensitivity scale included 12 CAQ
items (␣ reliability ⫽ .92). A sample item was “is subtly negativistic, tends to undermine and obstruct or sabotage.” High scores on
this scale were correlated with depression and hostility (Wink,
1992).
Defensiveness. To measure defensiveness, we scored a 10item defensiveness index based on the observer Q-sorts for each
participant. Sample items included “handles anxiety and conflicts
by refusing to recognize their presence; repressive or dissociative
tendencies” and “is emotionally bland; has flattened affect.” The
alpha coefficient of the defensiveness index was .77.
Social skills. We also derived a 3-item social skills index from
the observer Q-sorts for each participant. Sample items included
“has social poise and presence; socially at ease.” In the present
study, the alpha coefficient of the social skills index was .69.
Grade-point average. Subsequent academic performance was
measured using the participants’ overall grade-point average,
which was obtained from university records in the Haas School of
Business at Berkeley.

Results and Discussion
First, we examined the characteristics of the individuals who did
well in the group interactions. As expected, the target effect

1073

captured the qualities of healthy and competent extraverts (Table
3). Individuals with high target effect were described by the staff
assessors as having initiative, being energetic, and possessing
effective oral communication skills. Although the clinical observers interacted with these individuals in different settings from the
staff assessors, they also described these individuals as having
good social skills. Not surprisingly, the target effect was correlated
with higher resiliency and lower defensiveness as assessed by
clinical observers, as well as with better academic performance.
Second, we examined the adjustment correlates for two selfenhancement indices. As expected, the social-comparison index
did not capture the disagreeable and maladaptive qualities of
narcissists because of its confounding with the target effect. The
external correlates were consistent with those found in previous
research using the social-comparison index. The socialcomparison index portrayed self-enhancers as healthy extraverts.
That is, it was correlated positively with qualities that can make
good impressions in group contexts, similar to the external correlates of the target effect (e.g., initiative, energetic, and having oral
communication and presentation skills).
The external correlates showed a mixed portrait for the selfenhancers as defined by the social-comparison conception because
it is confounded with superior performance. This index did not
correlate with either ego-resiliency or subsequent academic performance. Self-enhancers, as assessed by the social-comparison
index, did not possess other important qualities that make them
well-adjusted. The social-comparison index was not correlated
significantly with either measure of narcissism, suggesting that this
self-enhancement index did not measure overly positive selfevaluations.
A different pattern emerged for the SRM index of selfenhancement. The SRM index of self-enhancement was correlated
positively with individual differences in both overt and covert
narcissism, as judged by the clinical observers. In other words, the

Table 3
Personality and Adjustment Correlates for the Target Effect and Self-Enhancement Indices
(Study 4)
Self-enhancement indices
Personality and adjustment measures
Self report
Narcissistic Personality Inventory (overt narcissism)
Assessment staff report
Initiative
Energy
Oral communication skills
Clinical observer report
Hypersensitivity (covert narcissism)
Ego-resilience
Defensiveness
Social skills
Objective indicators
Subsequent academic performance (GPA)

Target
effect

Social
comparison

SRM SE

⫺.14

.10

.23* (.21*)

.30*
.28*
.33*

⫺.27* (.09)
⫺.17* (.09)
⫺.32* (.00)

⫺.12
.31*
⫺.30*
.30*

.10
.08
.01
.06

.21* (.19*)
⫺.26* (⫺.19*)
.32* (.24*)
⫺.25* (⫺.15)

.23*

.02

⫺.22* (⫺.10)

.57*
.45*
.63*

Note. N ⫽ 102. Numbers inside of the parentheses are correlation coefficients after partialling out the target
effect. SRM ⫽ social relations model; GPA ⫽ grade-point average. SRM SE denotes the SRM index of
self-enhancement.
*
p ⬍ .05.

KWAN, JOHN, ROBINS, AND KUANG

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1074

SRM index of self-enhancement captured the narcissistic personality of self-enhancers, but the social-comparison index failed to
do so. Additionally, individuals who self-enhanced based on the
SRM index were rated by clinical observers as less resilient and
more defensive.
Third, we examined whether the social-comparison index is
associated with psychological adjustment merely because it is
confounded by the target effect. To address this, we examined the
external correlates of the social-comparison index after controlling
for its confounding with the target effect. As expected, the now
unconfounded social-comparison index was correlated very highly
with the SRM index, r ⫽ .91, p ⬍ .01. Exact equivalence is not
possible because the SRM corrects perceiver and target effect
estimates for missing-partner biases and controls for intergroup
differences, whereas the social-comparison index does not.
Additionally, the unconfounded social-comparison index shows
a very similar pattern of correlates as the SRM index. The pattern
of significant correlates was identical for these two indices, and
none of the correlates for the unconfounded social-comparison
index were significantly different from those for the SRM index,
ps ⬎ .05. After controlling for the target effect, all of the positive
correlates for the social-comparison index with effective performance disappeared (initiative, energy, and oral communication
skills) and significant correlations with narcissism, hypersensitivity, and defensiveness emerged.
Together these findings illustrate how the problematic confounding of the social-comparison index with the target effect
produces a distorted picture of self-enhancers. It was not selfenhancement per se that correlated with the positive descriptions
but rather the target effect. The confounding of the socialcomparison index with the target effect obscures the link between
self-enhancement and maladjustment, which is apparent when the
SRM index is used to assess self-enhancement.
Finally, did self-enhancers appear maladjusted only because of
their relatively poorer performance? To test this, we statistically
partialled out the target effect from the SRM index of selfenhancement and then re-examined its link with adjustment. As
Table 3 shows, self-enhancers still scored high in both overt and
covert narcissism. Additionally, self-enhancers were judged by the
independent clinical observers as less resilient and more defensive.
Furthermore, we found no evidence for a positive link between
self-enhancement and any indicators of adjustment. In sum, selfenhancement alone did not relate to positive adjustment.

General Discussion
In four studies, we implemented a componential approach to
examine self-enhancement. Studies 1 and 2 showed that the two
traditional indices of self-enhancement—social-comparison and
self-insight—are confounded and that the degree of confounding
depends on the personality trait domain being studied and the
amount of target and perceiver variance. Thus, the inconsistent
findings observed in the self-enhancement literature may, in part,
reflect differences across studies in the traits examined and the
amount of target and perceiver variance. The present findings are
informative for researchers to evaluate past studies of selfenhancement and to guide their future designs and their choices
about which self-enhancement index to use.

The findings of Studies 1 and 2 together are striking in that
measures of self-enhancement based on both strangers and wellacquainted individuals show the same confounds for the socialcomparison and self-insight indices. The observed confounding of
the self-insight index with the perceiver effect was lower when
acquainted individuals were used to assess self-enhancement in
Study 2 than when strangers were used in Study 1. These findings
suggest that future research on social perception that utilizes
strangers as a criterion for self-enhancement would be able to
follow the method used in Study 1.
Study 3 showed that the ranking procedure controls for the
confounding between the self-insight index and the perceiver
effect and renders the self-insight index equivalent to the SRMbased index. Thus, the use of rankings can provide a “quick fix”
for the confounding problem for the self-insight index. However,
the use of rankings poses other problems for studies of selfenhancement. Specifically, they create floor and ceiling effects
that constrain the measurement of individual differences in selfenhancement, particularly among high and low performers.
Study 4 demonstrated that the link between self-enhancement
and adjustment depends on which self-enhancement index is used.
For the self-enhancement index that we believe is the least confounded—the refined SRM index—self-enhancement was related
to indicators of maladjustment, including low levels of resiliency
and high levels of defensiveness and hypersensitivity. Moreover,
we found a significant pattern of correlates between the refined
index and measures of narcissism (convergence); thus, we can
have considerably more confidence in the validity of the refined
index using the SRM.
The social-comparison index, in contrast, showed a quite different pattern of correlates and provided a more mixed portrait of
the self-enhancing individual. Moreover, once the target effect was
partialled out of the social-comparison index, all of the positive
correlates became nonsignificant. The present research demonstrates how the confounding of the social-comparison index can
distort the link between self-enhancement and adjustment. When
the refined SRM index of self-enhancement and the target effect
are considered together and contrasted with the social-comparison
index, it becomes clear that self-enhancing individuals are indeed
maladjusted.

Limitations and Future Directions
Studies 1 and 2 examined the amount of perceiver and target
variance across traits. We did our best to ensure that the observers
had ample opportunities to observe the targets. However, it should
be noted that there would be no target variance if individuals differ
on the observed attributes but the observers are unable to recognize
or report on these differences. In this case, the SRM index confounds the tendency to self-enhance with true trait variance. Nevertheless, this is not a problem specific to the SRM approach. This
problem is of concern for all personality research relying on
human judgments of personality. Like most research involving
personality judgments, the present research defines individual differences in personality in terms of a social consensus (i.e., the
target effect). Social consensus implies agreement among independent observers and is often considered a valid indicator of personality (e.g., Block, 1961; Funder, 1995; McCrae, 1982). However,
there is certainly more to individual differences than what social

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COMPONENTIAL APPROACH TO SELF-ENHANCEMENT

consensus would indicate. If observers cannot pick up on this trait
variance, then the social consensus will not be an accurate reflection of true individual differences.
In Studies 1 and 2, we focused on broad domains of traits
(Extraversion, Agreeableness, and other traits). Other properties of
traits, such as ambiguity, observability, and evaluativeness, may
also influence the size of each variance component. Ambiguous
traits refer to those traits that describe a wide variety of behaviors
(Dunning, Meyerowitz, & Holzberg, 1989; Hampson, John, &
Goldberg, 1986). Judgments of ambiguous traits may contain more
perceiver variance and less target variance. Observable traits refer
to those traits that are easy to recognize and do not require
inferences (Gosling, John, Craik, & Robins, 1998). Judgments of
observable traits may contain less perceiver variance and more
target variance. Evaluative traits refer to how desirable or undesirable those traits would be for an individual to possess (John &
Robins, 1993). Judgments of evaluative traits may contain more
perceiver variance and less target variance. Future research should
extend the componential model to examine whether the perceiver
effect, the target effect, or the self-enhancement effect vary as a
function of these trait properties.
The nature of the situation may play a pivotal role in determining whether self-enhancement bias is adaptive or maladaptive.
Self-enhancers may be maladjusted as we found in Study 4 because success in business school depends heavily on the ability to
work with others. The self-centered nature of self-enhancers may
not help them to fare well in group contexts. However, selfenhancers may excel in environments where the key to success
does not require close collaborations with others. Future research
should examine whether the present findings generalize across
situational contexts and examine the effects of situation on the
value of self-enhancement.
The link between self-enhancement and adjustment may also
vary across relationships. Previous research has hinted that the
level of acquaintance is an important factor in determining the
effect of self-enhancement bias on adjustment (Colvin et al., 1995;
Paulhus, 1998). However, it remains unknown whether the ratings
obtained from short-term or long-term acquaintances are more or
less predictive of adjustment outcome. Self-enhancers may do well
as long as their close friends and family think highly of them, even
when they have fewer acquaintances. Future research should examine ratings that are made by the participants’ close friends and
relatives (e.g., Bonanno et al., 2005; Taylor et al., 2003) and
compare these ratings with ratings from short-term acquaintances
and the differences in how each type is linked with adjustment.
Furthermore, self-enhancement in certain trait domains may be
related to particular kinds of adjustment. To explore this possibility, we computed the trait-specific indices of self-enhancement for
each of the Big Five and then examined their relations with each
of the three adjustment outcomes in Study 2. These trait-specific
indices of self-enhancement show a similar but weaker pattern of
correlates to those of the overall index of self-enhancement. These
weaker correlations may be an artifact of the lower reliability of
the trait-specific measures because they comprise a smaller number of items than the overall index. Even if the different trait
indices are predictive of different types of adjustment, the three
measures of adjustment used in the original study may not allow us
to capture the differential relationship. To verify whether the link
between self-enhancement and adjustment depends on the partic-

1075

ular domain in which individuals are enhancing themselves, future
research should include a large number of traits and measures of
adjustment representing a wide range of domains. Until then, we
can develop an explicit theoretical account for the relations between different types of adjustment and self-enhancement across
the Big Five traits.
It should also be noted that the present research focused on three
indices of self-enhancement: social-comparison, self-insight, and
SRM. Nevertheless, some existing measures of self-enhancement
were developed on the basis of a different rationale than any of
these three indices. For example, the Self-Deceptive Enhancement
Scale (SDE; Paulhus, 1991) is based on the assumption that no
person could realistically endorse items indicating extreme levels
of rationality and appropriate behavior. Individuals who score high
on the SDE provide extreme endorsements (e.g., 7 on a 7-point
scale) to items such as “I don’t care to know what other people
really think of me,” “I always know why I like things,” and “I have
sometimes doubted my ability as a lover” (R).
An open question is whether measures such as SDE suffer from
the same confounding problem as the social-comparison and selfinsight indices of self-enhancement. The SDE items do not directly
tap into self-versus-other perceptions, nor do they reflect any
objective criterion for the truth. Extremely high endorsement of the
SDE items is assumed to reflect poor insight into one’s true
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Conceptually, the SDE may be
similar to the self-insight conception of self-enhancement. In line
with this reasoning, the SDE was found to be moderately correlated with the self-insight index (Paulhus, 1998). An interesting
direction for future research is to examine how measures such as
the SDE relate to the social-comparison index of self-enhancement
and the SRM measure within the same study.
Is the componential approach a pragmatic solution to research
on self-enhancement bias? One difficulty in applying the componential approach is that it requires the use of a round-robin design
in which each perceiver rates multiple targets and each target is
rated by multiple perceivers. This design is time-consuming to
carry out. In some contexts, more efficient alternatives to the
round-robin design might be available. For example, when objective criteria exist for evaluating the accuracy of self-reports, researchers can compare self-judgments with the objective criteria,
such as comparing self-perceived academic competence with actual grades (Farwell & Wohlwend-Lloyd, 1998; Gramzow, Elliot,
Asher, & McGregor, 2003; Robins & Beer, 2001). The use of an
objective criterion eliminates the confounding of self-enhancement
with the target effect, but the confounding with the perceiver effect
remains (i.e., individuals who believe they are more academically
competent than their actual grades indicate may believe that individuals are generally more academically competent than their
grades).
Nevertheless, most studies of self-enhancement have focused on
personality attributes and other constructs that are socially defined
and thus lack objective criteria (Robins & John, 1997b). In the
absence of a gold standard for accuracy, the use of the human
observer as an assessment tool is unavoidable. In these situations,
a round-robin design along with a componential approach to
analyzing the data remains the best choice for studying the unconfounded effects of self-enhancement.
Moreover, by examining the external correlates of the SRM
components, we were able to better understand which aspects of

KWAN, JOHN, ROBINS, AND KUANG

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

1076

self and other perception are linked to adjustment and which are
not. Previous research has primarily used consensual ratings of
individuals (conceptually similar to the target effect) as a criterion
in evaluating the accuracy of self-perceptions. As demonstrated in
Study 4, the target effect has substantive psychological meanings.
The ratings that the SRM indices were derived from are subtle:
those of observable behavior in a specific 40-min group interaction
setting. It is striking that these indices yielded meaningful and
impressive relations with independent observer ratings and subsequent academic performance. It would be an interesting direction
for future research to develop a more explicit account of the
nomological network of the different SRM components. Such
research would improve our understanding of how different components of interpersonal perception contribute to adjustment.
It is notable that the requirement for the round-robin design does
not pose as much difficulty to implement as some might believe.
Numerous studies have effectively implemented the componential
approach in a wide range of small group contexts, including
organizational work groups, study groups, minimal groups, and so
on (see Kenny, 1994 for a review). Moreover, a burgeoning body
of SRM research focuses on family dynamics and adolescent
problems (e.g., Branje, van Aken, van Lieshout, & Mathijssen,
2003; Cook, 2005; Hoyt, Finchan, McCullough, Maio, & Davila,
2005). All of these studies used a round-robin design, but their
focus has been on interpersonal perception rather than selfperception, which is less well integrated within the SRM framework. An interesting line of research that can emerge from the
application of the componential approach to self-enhancement
would be to determine whether delinquent adolescents are prone to
self-enhancement biases.
Some studies have suggested that narcissistically high selfesteem (i.e., self-enhancement) is linked to aggression (Baumeister, Campbell, Krueger, & Vohs, 2003), whereas other studies have
suggested that low, not high, self-esteem is linked to aggression,
juvenile delinquency, and other forms of antisocial behaviors
(Donnellan, Trzesniewski, Robins, Moffitt, & Caspi, 2005). This
debate would benefit from a componential analysis, which could
help disentangle high self-esteem (positive self-perception) from
self-enhancement (overly positive self-perception controlling for
perceiver and target effects). For example, whereas some juvenile
delinquents may see themselves overly positively compared with
how they see their family members, others may see themselves
negatively. By simultaneously assessing self-perceptions and perceptions of and by others (e.g., family members), researchers can
use the componential approach to break down self-esteem into its
genuine and inflated components and thereby clarify the nature of
the relation between self-esteem and aggression.

Conclusions
The findings of the present research, in conjunction with past
research, highlight the utility of the componential approach to
self-enhancement. Over 50 years ago, Cronbach (1950) advised
researchers that the best way to truly understand social perception
is to do a componential analysis to partition the ratings into their
constituent parts. The findings here encourage greater exploration
of the use of the componential approach in research on selfenhancement and self-perception. It is our hope that the use of the
componential approach will expand the breadth and depth of

research on self-perception and foster future research to explore
the psychological correlates and consequences of selfenhancement bias.

References
Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality: A psychological interpretation. New
York: Holt.
Bass, B. M., & Yammarino, F. J. (1991). Congruence of self and others’
leadership ratings of naval officers for understanding successful performance. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 40, 437– 454.
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Krueger, J. I., & Vohs, K. D. (2003).
Does high self-esteem cause better performance, interpersonal success,
happiness, or healthier lifestyles? Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, 4, 1– 44.
Block, J. (1961). The Q-sort method in personality assessment and psychiatric research. Oxford, England: Charles C. Thomas.
Block, J. (1978). The Q-sort method in personality assessment and psychiatric research. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Block, J., & Colvin, C. R. (1994). Positive illusions and well-being
revisited: Separating fiction from fact. Psychological Bulletin, 116, 28.
Bonanno, G. A., Field, N. P., Kovacevic, A., & Kaltman, S. (2002).
Self-enhancement as a buffer against extreme adversity: Civil war in
Bosnia and traumatic loss in the United States. Personality and Social
Personality Bulletin, 28, 184 –196.
Bonanno, G. A., Rennicke, C., & Dekel, S. (2005). Self-enhancement
among high-exposure survivors of the September 11th terrorist attack:
Resilience or social maladjustment? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 88, 984 –998.
Branje, S. J. T., van Aken, M. A. G., van Lieshout, C. F. M., & Mathijssen,
J. J. J. P. (2003). Personality judgments in adolescents’ families: The
perceiver, the target, their relationship, and the family. Journal of
Personality, 71, 41– 81.
Brown, J. D. (1986). Evaluations of self and others: Self-enhancement
biases in social judgments. Social Cognition, 4, 353–376.
Campbell, J. D., & Fehr, B. (1990). Self-esteem and perceptions of conveyed impression: Is negative affectivity associated with greater realism? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 122–133.
Campbell, W. K., Bush, C. P., Brunell, A. B., & Shelton, J. (2005).
Understanding the social costs of narcissism: The case of the tragedy of
the commons. Personality and Social Personality Bulletin, 31, 1358 –
1368.
Colvin, C. R., Block, J., & Funder, D. C. (1995). Overly positive selfevaluations and personality: Negative implications for mental health.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 1152–1162.
Cook, W. L. (2005). The SRM approach to family assessment: An introduction and case example. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 21, 216 –225.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). The Revised NEO Personality
Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Couch, A., & Keniston, K. (1960). Agreeing response set and social
desirability. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 62, 175–179.
Coyne, J. C., & Gotlib, I. H. (1983). The role of cognition in depression:
A critical appraisal. Psychological Bulletin, 94, 472–505.
Cronbach, L. J. (1950). Further evidence on response sets and test design.
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 10, 3–31.
Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., Robins, R. W., Moffitt, T. E., &
Caspi, A. (2005). Low self-esteem is related to aggression, antisocial
behavior, and delinquency. Psychological Science, 16, 328 –335.
Dunning, D., Meyerowitz, J. A., and Holzbert, A. D. (1989). Ambiguity
and self-evaluation: The role of idiosyncratic trait definitions in selfserving assessments of ability. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 1082–1090.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

COMPONENTIAL APPROACH TO SELF-ENHANCEMENT
Farwell, L., & Wohlwend-Lloyd, R. (1998). Narcissistic processes: Optimistic expectations, favorable self-evaluations, and self-enhancing attributions. Journal of Personality, 66, 65– 83.
Festinger, L. (1954). Motivation leading to social behavior. In M. R. Jones
(Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (Vol. 2, pp. 191–218). Lincoln: University of Nebraska.
Funder, D. C. (1995). On the accuracy of personality judgment: A realistic
approach. Psychological Review, 102, 652– 670.
Funder, D. C., & Dobroth, K. M. (1987). Differences between traits:
Properties associated with interjudge agreement. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 52, 409 – 418.
Gosling, S. D., John, O. P., Craik, K. H., & Robins, R. W. (1998). Do
people know how they behave? Self-reported act frequencies compared
with on-line codings by observers. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 1337–1349.
Gramzow, R. H., Elliot, A. J., Asher, E., & McGregor, H. A. (2003).
Self-evaluation bias and academic performance: Some ways and some
reasons why. Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 41– 61.
Hampson, S. E., John, O. P., & Goldberg, L. R. (1986). Category breadth
and hierarchical structure in personality: Studies of asymmetries in
judgments of trait implications. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 37–54.
Hofstee, W. K., deRaad, B., & Goldberg, L. R. (1992). Integration of the
Big Five and circumplex approaches to trait structure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 146 –163.
Hoyt, W. T., Finchan, F. D., McCullough, M. E., Maio, G., & Davila, J.
(2005). Responses to interpersonal transgressions in families: Forgivingness, forgivability, and relationship-specific effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 375–394.
Jackson, R. L. (1979). Material good need fulfillment as a correlate of
self-esteem. Journal of Social Psychology, 108, 139 –140.
John, O. P. (1990). The “Big Five” factor taxonomy: Dimensions of
personality in the natural language and in questionnaires. In L. Pervin
(Ed.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 66 –100).
New York: Guilford Press.
John, O. P., & Robins, R. (1993). Determinants of interjudge agreement on
personality traits: The Big Five domains, observability, evaluativeness,
and the unique perspective of the self. Journal of Personality, 61,
521–551.
John, O. P., & Robins, R. (1994). Accuracy and bias in self-perception:
Individual differences in self-enhancement and the role of narcissism.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 206 –219.
Kenny, D. A. (1994). Interpersonal perception: A social relations analysis.
New York: Guilford Press.
Kenny, D. A. (2004). PERSON: A general model of interpersonal perception. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 265–280.
Kenny, D. A., Albright, L., Malloy, T. E., & Kashy, D. A. (1994).
Consensus in interpersonal perception: Acquaintance and the Big Five.
Psychological Bulletin, 116, 245–258.
Klar, Y., & Giladi, E. E. (1997). No one in my group can be below the
group’s average: A robust positivity bias in favor of anonymous peers.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 885–901.
Klar, Y., & Giladi, E. E. (1999). Are most people happier than their peers,
or are they just happy? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25,
585–594.
Klohnen. E. C. (1996). Conceptual analysis and measurement of the
construct of ego-resiliency. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 1067–1079.
Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How
difficulties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated
self-assessments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
1121–1134.
Kwan, V. S. Y., John, O. P., Kenny, D. A., Bond, M. H., & Robins, R. W.

1077

(2004). Reconceptualizing individual differences in self-enhancement
bias: An interpersonal approach. Psychological Review, 111, 94 –110.
McCrae, R. R. (1982). Consensual validation of personality traits: Evidence from self-reports and ratings. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 43, 293–303.
Park, B., & Judd, C. M. (1989). Agreement on initial impressions: Differences due to perceivers, trait dimensions, and target behaviors. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 493–505.
Park, B., Kraus, S., & Ryan, C. S. (1997). Longitudinal changes in
consensus as a function of acquaintance and agreement in liking. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 604 – 616.
Paulhus, D. L. (1991). Measurement and control of response bias. In J. P.
Robinson, P. R. Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of
personality and social psychological attitudes (pp. 17–59). New York:
Academic Press.
Paulhus, D. L. (1998). Interpersonal and intrapsychic adaptiveness of trait
self-enhancement: A mixed blessing? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 1197–1208.
Paulhus, D. L., & Reynolds, S. (1995). Enhancing target variance in
personality impressions: Highlighting the person in person perception.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 1233–1242.
Raskin, R., & Terry, H. (1988). A principal-components analysis of the
Narcissistic Personality Inventory and further evidence of its construct
validity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 890 –902.
Robins, R. W., & Beer, J. S. (2001). Positive illusion about the self:
Short-term benefits and long-term costs. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 80, 340 –352.
Robins, R. W., & John, O. P. (1997a). Effects of visual perspective and
narcissism on self-perception: Is seeing believing? Psychological Science, 8, 37– 42.
Robins, R. W., & John, O. P. (1997b). The quest for self-insight: Theory
and research on accuracy and bias in self-perception. In R. Hogan, J. A.
Johnson, & S. R. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology.
(pp. 649 – 679). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Schuman, S., & Presser, H. (1980). The measurement of a middle position
in attitude surveys. Public Opinion Quarterly, 44, 70 – 85.
Sedikides, C., Rudich, E. A., Gregg, A. P., Kusmashiro, M., & Rusbult, C.
(2004). Are normal narcissists psychologically healthy? Self-esteem
matters. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 400 – 416.
Shedler, J., Mayman, M., & Manis, M. (1993). The illusion of mental
health. American Psychologist, 48, 1117–1131.
Soto, C. J., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2008) The developmental psychometrics of Big Five self-reports: Acquiescence, factor
structure, coherence, and differentiation from ages 10 to 20. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 718 –737.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Positive illusions and well-being: A
social psychological perspective on mental health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193–210.
Taylor, S. E., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (1995). Effects of mindset on positive
illusions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 213–226.
Taylor, S. E., Lerner, J. S., Sherman, D. K., Sage, R. M., & McDowell,
N. K. (2003). Portrait of a self-enhancer: Well adjusted and well liked or
maladjusted and friendless? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 165–176.
Wink, P. (1991). Two faces of narcissism. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 61, 590 –597.
Wink, P. (1992). Three types of narcissism in women from college to
mid-life. Journal of Personality, 60, 7–30.

Received March 6, 2006
Revision received January 22, 2008
Accepted January 29, 2008 䡲

