NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
J Pers Soc Psychol. 2008 February ; 94(2): 278–291. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.94.2.278.

How Attributional Ambiguity Shapes Physiological and Emotional
Responses to Social Rejection and Acceptance
Wendy Berry Mendes,
Harvard University
Shannon McCoy,
University of Maine
Brenda Major, and
University of California, Santa Barbara
Jim Blascovich
University of California, Santa Barbara

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abstract
The authors examined White and Black participants’ emotional, physiological, and behavioral
responses to same-race or different-race evaluators, following rejecting social feedback or accepting
social feedback. As expected, in ingroup interactions, the authors observed deleterious responses to
social rejection and benign responses to social acceptance. Deleterious responses included
cardiovascular (CV) reactivity consistent with threat states and poorer performance, whereas benign
responses included CV reactivity consistent with challenge states and better performance. In
intergroup interactions, however, a more complex pattern of responses emerged. Social rejection
from different-race evaluators engendered more anger and activational responses, regardless of
participants’ race. In contrast, social acceptance produced an asymmetrical race pattern—White
participants responded more positively than did Black participants. The latter appeared vigilant and
exhibited threat responses. Discussion centers on implications for attributional ambiguity theory and
potential pathways from discrimination to health outcomes.

Keywords

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

intergroup interactions; discrimination; attributional ambiguity; emotion and stress responses;
cardiovascular reactivity
Responses to social rejection and social acceptance may seem obvious—the former is bad and
the latter is good. However, this simple heuristic may not be relevant for all social interactions,
especially interracial ones. Social rejection by an outgroup member (i.e., different-race partner)
may be construed a variety of ways, including a sense that one’s self was rejected, that one’s
group was rejected, or that one’s partner was biased (e.g., racist). Ingroup rejection, in contrast,
is unlikely to be interpreted at a group level and is more likely to engender a person-level
attribution (e.g., self-blame). Social acceptance may also not be straightforward. To be sure,
social acceptance by an ingroup member is likely to be perceived positively and to instill good
feelings. However, social acceptance by an outgroup member may be viewed cautiously, with

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Wendy Berry Mendes, Department of Psychology, Harvard University,
33 Kirk-land Street, 1420 William James Hall, Cambridge, MA 02138. E-mail: wbm@wjh.harvard.edu.
Wendy Berry Mendes, Department of Psychology, Harvard University; Brenda Major and Jim Blascovich, Department of Psychology,
University of California, Santa Barbara; Shannon McCoy, Department of Psychology, University of Maine.

Mendes et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

individuals questioning the genuineness of the evaluation, possibly undermining the positive
feelings typically associated with social acceptance. In this research, we explored how social
rejection and acceptance are perceived, are responded to, and affect an ongoing social
interaction between same-race or different-race interaction partners.

Intraracial Interactions Versus Interracial Interactions
Social interactions with partners of different races have been known to produce stress, threat,
and anxiety (e.g., Ickes, 1984; Mendes, Blascovich, Lickel, & Hunter, 2002; Stephan &
Stephan, 2000). A growing body of research has demonstrated that individuals interacting with
or exposed to outgroup members exhibit more negatively toned responses. For example, White
participants engaged in cooperative social interactions with Black partners exhibited
cardiovascular (CV) reactivity consistent with the psychological state of threat and performed
less well on a cognitive task than did White participants interacting with White partners, who
exhibited a benign CV pattern related to challenge states (Blascovich, Mendes, Hunter, Lickel,
& Kowai-Bell, 2001; Mendes et al., 2002).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

These effects do not seem to be limited to majority members interacting with minority
members. Richeson, Shelton, and their colleagues (Richeson & Shelton, 2003; Richeson,
Trawalter, & Shelton, 2005) found that both White and Black participants showed a reduction
in their ability to inhibit Stroop responses following interactions with outgroup partners relative
to interactions with ingroup partners. These authors interpreted this failure of inhibition as
demonstrating that intergroup interactions require more effortful regulation than do ingroup
interactions.
It is important to note that these examples featured an evaluatively neutral paradigm. For
example, in the CV studies, the confederates were instructed to behave neutrally during the
interaction. Such neutral interactions allow for more ambiguity regarding how one is evaluated
or regarded. In contrast, in the current study, we examined interracial encounters in which
participants experienced explicit social rejection or social acceptance. We reasoned that the
complexity of the attributions for and responses to this feedback would differ dramatically,
depending on whether it occurred within a same-race or a different-race context (see Crocker
& Major, 1989).

Social Evaluation in Ingroup Interactions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Therapists, teachers, and grandmothers all know that when people receive positive social
feedback they are likely to feel better about themselves than when they receive negative social
feedback (e.g., rejection or ostracism). Likewise, psychological research has shown that social
acceptance versus social rejection differentially affect mood, self-esteem, behavior, and
physiology (Crocker, Cornwell, & Major, 1993; Dickerson, Gruenewald, & Kemeny, 2004;
Leary et al., 2003). Indeed, social acceptance is so central to well-being that the need to belong
to social groups, an implicit form of social acceptance, is recognized as an important social
motive in humans and primates (e.g., Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Cheney, Seyfarth, & Smuts,
1986)
In contrast, social rejection is painful and typically engenders internal negative emotions like
shame, sadness, and even depression (Ayduk, Mischel, & Downey, 2002; Williams, 2001).
Social rejection, including ostracism, exclusion, and loneliness, has far-reaching negative
effects on physical health (Cacioppo, Hawkley, & Bernston, 2003; Stroud, Tanofsky-Kraff,
Wilfley, & Salovey, 2000) and mental health (Williams, 2001). Social rejection has been shown
to influence neural activation, as well. In one study, participants who were ostracized exhibited
increased regional activity in the anterior cingulate cortex, an area of the brain that is also active
during physical pain (Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003). These findings suggest that
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 3

social acceptance can lead to positive feelings and benign responses, whereas social rejection
is likely to lead to internal negative emotions and more malignant responses.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Social Evaluation in Intergroup Interactions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

But how are social acceptance and rejection construed in intergroup interactions? Although
the use of social acceptance and rejection paradigms to create positive and negative affective
states has been ubiquitous in psychological research, social evaluation has typically been
examined within same-race interactions or without regard to the intergroup context. A notable
early exception is research by Crocker, Voelkl, Testa, and Major (1991). In their study, Black
participants and White participants were socially accepted or socially rejected by a White
partner (confederate) who the participant believed was either aware or unaware of the
participant’s race. Black participants who were rejected by a White partner who they believed
knew their race attributed the feedback to discrimination more frequently than did participants
in any other condition, and their self-esteem did not decrease from preexperiment levels. These
authors reasoned that the ability of Black participants to attribute negative feedback to
discrimination could protect their self-esteem from rejection. The importance of this article
notwithstanding, this research was imbalanced in that majority group members’ reactions to
positive or negative feedback were examined within an intraracial encounter, whereas minority
group members’ reactions were examined within an interracial encounter. This leaves
unanswered whether this effect is an intergroup phenomenon or a phenomenon related to
minority group status.
Social Rejection From an Outgroup Member
Though rejection from an ingroup member is likely to engender internal negative emotions
(i.e., internalization) and self-blame, rejection within the context of an intergroup interaction
may evoke external negative emotions (i.e., externalization) such as anger. This may occur
because interracial interactions are more attributionally ambiguous and thus bring about more
possible reasons for rejection, including the attribution that one may have experienced
discrimination (Crocker & Major, 1989). Attributions to discrimination may shift explanations
for the cause of rejection from internal reasons to external ones, thereby protecting self-esteem
(Major, Quinton, & Schmader, 2003). Although attributing rejection to discrimination can
protect self-esteem, it can also lead to increased anger (Major, Quinton, & McCoy, 2002).
Indeed, anger has been identified as the most common emotional state to follow perceptions
of racism (Bullock & Houston, 1987; see also Clark, Anderson, Clark, & Williams, 1999).
Social Acceptance From an Outgroup Member

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Though counterintuitive, evidence is mounting that social acceptance from outgroup members
may not always translate into benign or positive affective consequences. Indeed, Crocker et
al. (1991) found significant drops in self-esteem among Black participants who received
positive evaluations from White partners who could see them and hence knew their race.
Similarly, Cohen and colleagues (G. L. Cohen, Steele, & Ross, 1999) found that Black
participants receiving critical feedback plus praise for a written essay perceived the evaluator
to be higher in bias, and they were more likely to disidentify from the evaluated domain than
were White participants receiving similar feedback. These studies suggested that positive
feedback might be discounted within an interracial interaction.
Another potential pitfall of positive feedback in the interracial context is that such feedback
may be perceived as overcorrecting (Vorauer & Turpie, 2004). White participants may be
motivated to appear nonprejudiced and, in trying to be nonprejudiced, may act overly friendly
(Plant & Devine, 1998). They may also be motivated to distort their responses because of
political correctness concerns and, as a result, may behave in ways that do not reflect their true

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 4

feelings. The disingenuousness of these actions may be detected by Blacks, increasing feelings
of uncertainty regarding the cause of social acceptance.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Examining how people respond to interracial acceptance and rejection is complicated by
several factors. As noted above, interracial interactions are prone to deliberate distortions in
responses, such that participants may be unwilling to report their true thoughts and feelings for
fear of appearing prejudiced. People may also be motivated to claim that they were not a target
of discrimination because in so doing they may suffer social costs, such as being perceived as
a whiner or troublemaker (Kaiser & Miller, 2001). Furthermore, repression—claiming to not
feel anxious or stressed coupled with high defensiveness—may be a common coping response
to prejudice, leading to self-reports of positive emotion and well-being while nonetheless
taking a physical toll on the body (Barger, Marsland, Bachen, & Manuck, 2000; Weinberger,
Schwartz, & Davidson, 1979). Thus, evaluation apprehension, repression, and denial of
discrimination may all increase the difficulty of obtaining unexpurgated responses to
acceptance and rejection during interracial encounters.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Because of these issues, we relied on multiple measures to examine responses to acceptance
versus rejection in same-race interactions or different-race interactions. We included measures
that are viewed as assessing more automatic responses as a way to circumvent intentional
distortions between what individuals feel and think and what they self-report. We measured
CV responses, cognitive performance, nonverbal behavior and emotional displays (as coded
by observers), in addition to self-reports.

Biopsychosocial Model of Challenge and Threat
To ground our predictions and interpretation of multiple measures, we used a framework to
organize responses associated with activational states versus inhibitional states. Challenge and
threat theory (Blascovich & Mendes, 2000; Blascovich & Tomaka, 1996) posits that during
active tasks, individuals’ appraisals of situational demands relative to resources result in a
cascade of CV, hormonal, behavioral, affective, and cognitive consequences that can index
motivational states associated with activational responses versus inhibitional responses.
Challenge states are activational responses and occur when personal resources exceed
situational demands. Consequently, CV responses exhibited in challenge states tend to be
associated with greater sympathetic adrenal medullary activation, thus increasing ventricular
contractility (VC), cardiac efficiency, and vasodilation in the arterioles, which provide greater
blood flow to the periphery. The CV pattern of reactivity associated with challenge is similar
(if not identical) to the Pattern 1 (activational) response (see Brownley, Hurwitz, &
Schneiderman, 2000).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In contrast, threat states are inhibitional responses and result when situational demands exceed
personal resources. CV reactivity exhibited in threat states consists of less efficient cardiac
output (CO) and vasoconstriction. Similar to the Pattern 2 (inhibitional) response, CV reactivity
during threat states is believed to be associated with avoidant and defeat-related motivation
(Brownley et al., 2000).
Challenge and threat have typically been linked to high arousal, positive emotions and high
arousal, negative emotions, respectively; more precisely, these states index motivational
tendencies rather than affective states (Herrald & Tomaka, 2002; see also Feldman Barrett,
2006) and, thus, are orthogonal to valence. Therefore, challenge responses are more likely
indexing approach motivation and not necessarily positive emotion. One implication of this is
that approach-negative emotions, like anger, should be more closely related to challenge than
to threat (see Harmon-Jones & Allen, 1998, for a conceptually similar argument related to
prefrontal cortical asymmetry).
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

If both high arousal positive emotions (e.g., pride, happiness) and anger are associated with
activational patterns, can they be differentiated physiologically? A search of literature on
emotion specificity of autonomic nervous system revealed sparse evidence for autonomic
nervous system differences in emotion (Cacioppo, Bernston, Larsen, Poehlmann, & Ito,
2000; cf., Levenson, Ekman, & Friesen, 1990). However, a meta-analysis by Cacioppo and
colleagues (Cacioppo et al., 2000) suggested one measure that may differentiate between
positive emotions and anger: heart rate (HR). Specifically, their meta-analysis showed that
anger is associated with higher HR than is happiness. Another promising measure that may
differentiate anger from positive emotion is VC. Sinha, Lovallo, and Parsons (1992) found
greater increases in VC during anger imagery than during joy imagery. Similarly, using core
relational themes, Herrald and Tomaka (2002) reported greater VC during anger than during
pride. Therefore, on the basis of this literature, we predicted that within a challenge state,
magnitude differences in VC and HR reactivity might differentiate anger from positive
emotions. A summary of our predictions differentiating challenge and threat and
differentiating, within challenge responses, positive emotions and anger are presented in Figure
1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Integrating attributional ambiguity theory with a motivational perspective allows us to
investigate effects of attributional ambiguity that were previously unclear or unspecified, as
well as to extend the theory. Specifically, it is unclear why self-esteem does not decrease
following attributions to discrimination. Are participants simply disengaging from the social
interaction with a prejudiced person? Are the self-esteem effects observed due simply to
individuals masking the pain of being a target of discrimination and self-reporting that they
are not affected by the discrimination when, in reality, they are feeling anxiety and threat? Is
buffered self-esteem a defensive reaction? In a motivational framework, these questions can
be explored. In addition, this work examines negative affective responses that are differentiated
along the lines of internal emotional responses and external emotional responses. This allows
us to make more nuanced predictions regarding the effects of perceived discrimination
compared with social rejection that is not perceived as discriminatory.

Overview of Experiment and Predictions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In the following study, White participants and Black participants arrived at the laboratory and
met a White, same-sex confederate or a Black, same-sex confederate. Sensors to measure CV
responses were applied and, after a baseline period, the participant delivered a speech that the
confederate evaluated. After the speech, the participant received an evaluation form ostensibly
completed by the confederate, which consisted of either negative (rejecting) or positive
(accepting) social feedback. Participants then completed attributions for feedback. After
completion of attributions, an audiovisual connection allowed the confederate and the
participant to see and hear each other, and the dyad completed a cooperative task.
We predicted that same-race dyads, compared with different-race dyads, would respond
differently to accepting and rejecting feedback. Specifically, we predicted that rejection by a
same-race partner would result in participants exhibiting CV responses consistent with threat,
internal negative emotions (especially anxiety and shame), and poorer cognitive performance.
In contrast, rejection by a different-race partner was expected to be perceived as more
discriminatory and to result in more anger, better performance, and activational CV responses.
With respect to social acceptance, we predicted that participants would respond to social
acceptance from same-race partners with generally benign reactions, including positive
emotions, challenge states, and better performance. In contrast, we expected that positive social
feedback from a different-race partner would be attributionally ambiguous, particularly for
Black participants, who might doubt the genuineness of the feedback. Thus, we expected these

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 6

participants to show inhibitional responses, such as CV threat responses, anxiety increases,
and behavioral manifestations of vigilance.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although our predictions for Black participants paired with White partners were clear, we were
agnostic regarding whether White participants paired with Black partners would reveal the
same patterns. Thus, a key question of this research was whether intergroup interaction effects
were symmetrical—occurring similarly for Black participants and White participants—or
asymmetrical—occurring only for Black participants in interracial interactions.

Method
Setting and Participants
A social psychophysiology laboratory served as the experimental setting. We recruited Black
and White male and female undergraduate participants (N = 122; 49% Black and 51% White;
31% men and 69% women) who received either course credit or $10 and who all received a
$5 bonus (see below).
Confederates

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We trained seventeen1 Black and White male and female research assistants to be confederates
for this study. Some confederates were hired from a neighboring college to limit the possibility
that participants would know the confederate. Every race–gender combination had at least three
different confederates. We instructed the confederates, who were blind to the feedback
manipulation, to act interested but neutral throughout the experiment.
Procedure
Arrival—Participants arrived individually and waited with the confederate. Two
experimenters emerged from the control room, confirmed the names, and introduced the
participant and the confederate to each other, making sure that they did not previously know
each other. At this point, one of the experimenters instructed the dyad to select from a bowl
one of two cards that read either A or B. The participant and confederate showed each other
what they selected, and they were then escorted to different experimental rooms, where the
participant completed the consent form. The experimenter then applied the various sensors
needed to record CV responses, and the participant was instructed to sit for a quiet, 5-min
baseline period. At this time, the experimenter applied nonoperating sensors to the confederate
because the participant and confederate would be seeing each other during the cooperative
task.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Speech task—After the baseline period, the participant was instructed via intercom that the
rooms would be connected so that the two could hear each other. We then played one of two
prere-corded instructions for the speech task, depending on whether the participant chose the
A card or the B card. The instructions revealed that the person who chose A (or B) had been
assigned to the performer condition and that the person who chose B (or A) had been assigned
to the evaluator condition. The participant was always the performer. They were further
instructed that the performer would have to deliver a speech on the topic of “Why I Make a
Good Friend” for 2 min, after a 1-min preparation period, while the evaluator listened to the
speech. The participant prepared silently for a minute, and he or she was then instructed by the
experimenter to begin and to end the speech. Once the speech ended, the experimenter
disconnected the audio connection.

1We used a large number of confederates because this study spanned four academic quarters (almost 18 months). The study took a long
time to complete because Black students constituted only 3% of the campus population at the time.
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Feedback manipulation—After the speech, the experimenter waited 3 min and then entered
the participant’s room with an envelope that he or she handed to the participant. The
experimenter explained that inside the envelope was the partner’s evaluation form. The
participant was instructed to take out the evaluation form, to review it, and to place it back in
the envelope when done. The experimenters were kept blind to the valence of the feedback
form inside the envelope, and the experimenters returned to the participant’s room only after
the participant finished reviewing the form. The only person who knew the type of feedback
was the director of the study, who had no contact with the participant until the debriefing.
The evaluator’s form contained the feedback manipulation. There were five questions on the
form: “I would like to be in a small class with the other subject,” “I would like to work closely
with the other subject,” “I would like to get to know the other subject better,” I would enjoy
being roommates with the other subject,” and “I would like to be close friends with the other
subject.” The social acceptance condition consisted of the first two items with the second
highest ratings (+3) and the final three items with the highest ratings (+4). The rejection
condition consisted of zero ratings for the first three items, −1 for the fourth item, and −2 for
the fifth item. Following the review of the evaluator’s form, the experimenter returned to the
room, took the envelope, and gave the participant the attributions questionnaire.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Word-finding task—Upon participants’ completion of the attribution questionnaire, we
connected the rooms in which the participant and confederate sat, but this time they could see
and hear each other over large (27 in. [68.5 cm]) television monitors. We then provided
instructions for the cooperative word-finding task (similar to the game of Boggle), which
required participants to find words in an 8 letter × 8 letter matrix. Participants were instructed
that if the two participants performed to a stated criterion, they would each earn a $5 bonus.
Just before they began the task, they completed emotion ratings. Then, the task began and lasted
4 min. The dyad alternated finding words; the confederate, who had a list of valid words
displayed on their computer monitor, responded with words in a predetermined timing
schedule. We tracked the number of words participants found as an indicator of performance.
At the end of the task, we disconnected the rooms. We then unhooked the sensors and began
the debriefing. Prior to the debriefing, we probed for suspicion, taking care to ascertain that
the participants were not suspicious of the feedback or of their partners.
Measures

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Physiological measures—Cardiac and hemodynamic measures were recorded
noninvasively according to psychophysiological guidelines (e.g., Sherwood et al., 1990). A
Minnesota (Chapel Hill, NC) model 304B impedance cardiograph, a Cortronics model 7000
continuous blood pressure monitor, and a Coulbourn (Allentown, PA) model S75–11
electrocardiograph amplifier/coupler provided the physiological signals. Impedance
cardiograph and electrocardiograph recordings provided continuous measures of cardiac
performance. In impedance cardiography, a Mylar tape electrode system provides basal
transthoracic impedance and the first derivative of basal impedance. Two pairs of tapes are
used to encircle the participant at the neck and at the torso and are secured with electrodes. A
4mA AC 100 kHz current passes through the two outer electrodes and measures basal
impedance from the two inner electrodes. The electrocardiograph recordings were obtained
with a Standard Lead II configuration (right arm, left leg, and right leg ground). A Cortronics
blood pressure monitor provided continuous noninvasive recordings of blood pressure. An
interactive software program (Kelsey & Guethlein, 1990) was used to record and score the
cardiac and hemodynamic data.
We differentiated activational (challenge) and inhibitional (threat) states with CV reactivity
(i.e., changes from baseline) focusing on VC, CO, and total peripheral resistance (TPR), the

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

latter derived from blood pressure and CO with the formula (MAP/CO) × 80, where MAP is
mean arterial pressure. We then differentiated high arousal positive emotions from anger by
examining magnitude differences in cardiac responses, specifically VC and HR.
Self-reports—Upon reviewing the evaluator’s form, participants completed a scale assessing
their attributions for the feedback. Embedded in theoretically irrelevant attributions for the
feedback (e.g., to participant’s religion, personality, and gender) were two items related to the
evaluator’s prejudice: “Indicate the degree to which each influenced the other student’s
evaluation of you: (1) the evaluator was prejudiced; and (2) the evaluator discriminated against
me.” We combined these two items into a composite measure of attributions to discrimination
(α = .67).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We measured participants’ emotional states immediately preceding the cooperative task (and
hence, following feedback), using 10 items from Stephan and Stephan’s (1985) intergroup
anxiety measure. Participants were instructed to indicate how much of each state (ease,
awkwardness, self-consciousness, anxiety, acceptance, confidence, irritation, defensiveness,
suspicion, and certainty) they were feeling right now, from −4 to +4. We used these responses
to form three indexes related to the predictions: externally directed negative emotions/anger
(defensive and irritated; α = .82), internally directed negative emotions (awkward, anxious,
and self-conscious; α = .68), and positive emotions (accepting, confident, at ease, and certain;
α = .83).
Behavioral observation and coding—Black and White men and women (N = 11; 6 Black
and 5 White) from a different university were trained to code the videotaped cooperative task.
Training consisted of a group instructional session, followed by everyone scoring the same 10
participants and determining reliability across those participants. Interrater reliability was high
(alphas ranged from .72 to .90 for emotions; α = .92 for the behavioral variable). Once
consistency was established, each task exchange was scored by two coders: one White and one
Black. We were interested in four categories of emotion and behavior: external negative
emotion, internal negative emotion, positive emotion, and vigilance. We operationalized
vigilance as the number of times the participant looked away from the computer with the letter
matrix on it and toward their partner during the word-finding task. By looking away from the
computer, participants undermined their performance because they were losing time that could
be spent finding a word. Coders also rated participants on relevant emotions from the Positive
and Negative Affectivity Schedule (Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). We focused on the same
three indexes of emotion described earlier: external negative emotions (irritable and hostile;
α = .82); internal negative emotions (ashamed, nervous, distressed, upset, guilty, and jittery;
α = .88); and positive emotions (proud, attentive, inspired, and strong; α = .67).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Results
During debriefing, 4 participants expressed suspicion regarding the authenticity of the
feedback. We analyzed data with and without these participants, and no significant differences
were observed between the full sample and the reduced sample. We present the data below
with the suspicious participants excluded.
Various time points from the physiological data were unscorable because of faulty sensors,
loss of signal, or noisy signals. Thus, the physiological data have variable degrees of freedom.
Videotapes of 7 additional participants were impossible to code, either because of the quality
of the video or because the video was cut off during the interaction.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 9

CV Data: Baseline and Speech Reactivity

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mean VC, CO, HR, TPR, and MAP values were calculated for each minute within each rest
and task period. We began by examining the last minute of the baseline for differences based
on participants’ race, evaluators’ race, and/or feedback manipulation. Though random
assignment was successful and there were no baseline differences in CV responses due to
feedback or evaluator’s race, there were differences in VC between White participants and
Black participants, F(1, 106) = 12.16, p < .0007. Black participants exhibited a shorter
preejection period (M = 102.4, SD = 12.27) than did White participants (M = 111.7, SD =
15.00). Because of these baseline differences, we conducted all subsequent analyses examining
VC reactivity by controlling for participants’ baseline VC.
We then examined CV responses during the speech that occurred prior to the feedback
manipulation. There were no differences in responses by evaluator’s race or participant’s race.
It is important to note that the speech was not a face-to-face speech, which appears to more
reliably lead to differences in CV reactivity as a result of the situational context (Mendes,
Blascovich, Hunter, Lickel, & Jost, 2007).
Analytic Strategy

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hypotheses testing began with an examination of the various dependent variables (CV
reactivity, self-reports, attributions, performance, and observers’ ratings) and the three
independent variables (participant’s race, evaluator’s race, and feedback) in a series of 2 × 2
× 2 analyses of variance (ANOVAs). We first examined whether the three-way interactions
were significant. We obtained significant three-way interactions for most of the critical
dependent variables: attributions to discrimination, self-reported external negative emotion
(i.e., anger), CV responses (CO and TPR), performance, and observers’ coding indexing
vigilance and positive emotion. A complete summary of the full model ANOVAs are presented
in Table 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We then decomposed the significant three-way interactions by examining the effects of
participant’s race and evaluator’s race separately for the rejection conditions and the acceptance
conditions. To conduct these simple effects tests, we used the overall mean square error and
degrees of freedom found in Table 1. Significant two-way interactions were then further
examined by simple effects tests, within participant’s race, to determine whether the effect for
evaluator’s race was significant. Finally, we tested our a priori predictions regarding
differences between Black participants and White participants paired with different-race
partners, which we tested using planned contrasts. Specifically, we examined whether Black
participants paired with White evaluators differed from White participants paired with Black
evaluators. Nonsignificant differences are characterized as symmetrical effects and significant
differences are characterized as asymmetrical effects. We also examined participant race
effects in same-race pairings, and we never observed any significant race effects. That is, within
both feedback conditions, Black participants paired with Black evaluators yielded patterns of
findings similar to White participants paired with White evaluators. Means and standard
deviations are found in Table 2.
Attributions
Not surprisingly, participants were more likely to attribute the cause of feedback to
discrimination after social rejection than they were to attribute the cause of feedback to
discrimination after social acceptance, F(1, 110) = 29.59, p < .001. Furthermore, participants,
in general, were more likely to attribute feedback to discrimination when the evaluators were
White than when the evaluators were Black, F(1, 110) = 6.76, p < .01. However, the predicted
three-way interaction was significant, F(1, 110) = 7.35, p < .008. To decompose this interaction,

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 10

we conducted simple effects tests within the social rejection condition and within the social
acceptance condition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Within the social rejection condition, the Participant × Evaluator race interaction was
significant, F(1, 110) = 9.71, p < .01. As expected, Black participants were more likely to
attribute rejection to discrimination when paired with White evaluators than when paired with
Black evaluators, F(1, 110) = 14.18, p < .001. Among White participants, the direction of the
means was consistent with predictions—more attributions to discrimination when the evaluator
was Black than when the evaluator was White—but this simple effect was not significant, F
(1, 110) = 1.01, ns. Comparisons of responses within the different-race dyads revealed that
Black participants paired with White evaluators were more likely to attribute rejection to
discrimination (M = 2.9, SD = 0.98) than were White participants paired with Black evaluators
(M = 2.5, SD = 0.87), although this difference was not significant, F(1, 110) = 1.75, ns. In sum,
Black participants were more likely to attribute rejection to discrimination in a different-race
interaction than in a same-race interaction, but among the different-race dyads, there were no
significant differences between Black participants and White participants.
As the main effect for feedback revealed, attributions to discrimination were low following
social acceptance. None of the simple effects and none of the planned contrasts were significant
(Fs < 1).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Emotion Ratings
We then examined the self-reported emotion ratings that participants completed prior to the
cooperative task but following the feedback. As expected, there were main effects for feedback.
Participants who received social acceptance feedback reported more positive emotion than
those who received social rejection feedback, F(1, 110) = 7.72, p < .007. Similarly, participants
reported more external negative emotion when they received social rejection feedback than
when they received social acceptance, F(1, 110) = 31.66, p < .001. Consistent with our
predictions, however, the three-way interaction for external negative emotions was significant,
F(1, 110) = 4.58, p < .04.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Again, we decomposed the interaction by first examining the effects of the interaction of
participant’s race and evaluator’s race separately for social rejection and social acceptance
conditions. Among those who received social rejection feedback, the Participant × Evaluator
race interaction was significant, F(1, 110) = 4.20, p < .05. White participants rejected by a
Black evaluator reported more external negative emotions than did White participants rejected
by a White evaluator, F(1, 110) = 3.85, p < .052. Similarly, Black participants rejected by a
White evaluator reported more anger than did those rejected by a Black evaluator, though this
effect was not significant, F(1, 110) = 2.70, p < .10, Cohen’s d = .31. We then compared the
means from Black and White participants paired with different-race partners. In support of the
symmetrical prediction, Black and White participants did not significantly differ in their reports
of external negative emotions (F < 1). We did not hypothesize or observe differences in external
negative emotion among the groups who received social acceptance feedback.
CV Responses
To test our predictions for CV reactivity, we focused on the first minute of the task because
cardiac habituation can occur quickly, thus differences in cardiac responses related to challenge
and threat are most pronounced in the earlier minutes. However, the effects we observed for
the first minute persisted for the entire 4 min of the task. The three-way interactions were
observed for CO, F(1, 102) = 8.13, p < .006, and for TPR, F(1, 102) = 15.02, p < .001. The
three-way interaction for VC, controlling for baseline VC, was not significant, F(1, 102) =
2.31, p < .13.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We hypothesized that social rejection from a same-race partner would result in CV responses
consistent with threat (lower CO and higher TPR), whereas rejection from a different-race
partner would result in activational CV responses (relatively higher CO and lower TPR).
Consistent with predictions, we observed significant Participant × Evaluator race interactions
for CO, F(1, 102) = 6.43, p < .05, and for TPR, F(1, 102) = 11.18, p < .05. Decomposing the
two-way interactions revealed significant (or near significant) differences by evaluator’s race
for Black participants, for CO, F(1, 102) = 3.10, p < .08, and for TPR, F(1, 102) = 6.38, p < .
013. Black participants rejected by Black evaluators exhibited significantly greater increases
in vascular resistance and exhibited less cardiac efficiency than did those rejected by White
evaluators (see Table 2 and Figure 2). Similar patterns of reactivity were observed among
White participants for CO, F(1, 102) = 8.33, p < .01, and for TPR, F(1, 102) = 6.12, p < .02.
In general, rejection from a same-race partner resulted in increased TPR and decreased CO
(i.e., a threat pattern of CV reactivity), whereas rejection from a different-race partner resulted
in decreased TPR and increased CO (i.e., an activational pattern of CV reactivity). An
examination of the effects within the different-race dyads revealed no effects for participant’s
race. Both White and Black participants rejected by different-race partners exhibited
activational CV patterns (Fs < 1).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our predictions following social acceptance were that a same-race partner would engender CV
reactivity consistent with activational responses (higher CO and lower TPR), whereas positive
feedback from a different-race partner might engender CV reactivity threat (lower CO and
higher TPR). The Participant × Evaluator race interactions were significant for TPR, F(1, 102)
= 4.52, p < .036, and near significant for CO, F(1, 102) = 3.11, p < .08 (Figure 3). Among
Black participants, those paired with White evaluators exhibited significantly lower CO
reactivity (M = −0.5, SD = 1.0) and greater TPR reactivity (M = 184.8, SD = 417) than did
those paired with Black evaluators (CO: M = 0.8, SD = 1.1; TPR: M = −97.4, SD = 201), for
CO, F(1, 102) = 4.89, p < .03, and for TPR, F(1, 102) = 8.22, p < .005. Black participants who
received positive social feedback from White evaluators exhibited CV reactivity consistent
with threat, whereas Black participants who received positive feedback from Black evaluators
exhibited CV reactivity consistent with challenge. The simple effects tests among White
participants were not significant (Fs < 1). White participants who received social acceptance
feedback exhibited CV responses consistent with challenge states, regardless of the race of the
evaluator. Planned contrasts confirmed the asymmetry, for CO, F(1, 102) = 4.84, p < .03, and
for TPR, F(1, 102) = 5.21, p < .025. Black participants exhibited threat CV responses in
different-race pairings, whereas White participants exhibited challenge responses in differentrace pairings.
Performance

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We operationalized performance as the number of words identified by the participant during
the word-finding task. We observed a main effect for race, F(1, 108) = 5.62, p < .01 (on average,
White participants found more words than Black participants); however, it is important to note
that White participants were more likely to report that they played a similar word game (44%)
in the past than were Black participants (29%). Because past experience with similar games is
an important predictor of performance, we controlled for past experience in all analyses. We
again observed the three-way interaction, F(1, 108) = 8.26, p < .005.
We predicted that participants who showed activational responses would perform better than
those who showed an inhibitional response. Following the confirmation of the predictions with
CV reactivity, we anticipated that those who were rejected by a different-race evaluator would
perform better than would those rejected by a same-race evaluator. Consistent with the
predictions, the Participant × Evaluator race interaction was significant, F(1, 108) = 3.92, p < .
05. Among Black participants, those rejected by White evaluators performed better than did

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

those rejected by Black evaluators, though this was short of significance, F(1, 108) = 2.65, p
< .10, Cohen’s d = .57. Similarly, among White participants, those rejected by Black evaluators
performed better than did those rejected by White evaluators, but again this effect was not
significant, F(1, 108) = 2.83, p < .09, Cohen’s d = .61. In general, participants rejected by a
different-race partner performed (marginally) better than did those rejected by a same-race
partner. We then examined the performance effects within the different-race pairings. Even in
light of the participant race main effect described above, the difference between Black
participants paired with White evaluators (adjusted M =13.2, SD = 4.5) and White participants
paired with Black evaluators (adjusted M = 15.9, SD = 5.6) was not significant, F(1, 108) =
2.15, p < .15.
Among those who received social acceptance feedback, the Participant × Evaluator race
interaction was significant, F(1, 108) = 3.99, p < .048. The simple effects test among Black
participants was significant, F(1, 108) = 5.61, p < .02. Black participants performed better
when paired with Black evaluators who gave positive feedback, compared with Black
participants paired with White evaluators. Among White participants, the effect for evaluator’s
race was not significant (F < 1). The planned contrast comparing Black participants with White
evaluators and White participants with Black evaluators was also significant, F(1, 108) = 5.86,
p < .025. Black participants paired with White evaluators performed worse than did White
participants paired with Black evaluators.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Behavior
Our final dependent variables were from the behavioral coding, in which coders (blind to the
social feedback condition) rated the extent to which participants appeared vigilant (monitored
the other participant) and displayed internal negative emotions (e.g., shame), external negative
emotions (e.g., anger), and positive emotions during the word-finding task. The three-way
interactions were confirmed for vigilance, F(1, 98) = 3.96, p < .05, and for positive emotions,
F(1, 103) = 4.91, p < .03. The interaction for external negative emotions was just short of
significance, F(1, 103) = 3.10, p < .08, Cohen’s d = .03.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Among those who received social rejection, the two-way interactions were not significant for
vigilance or positive emotions. We predicted that those paired with different-race evaluators
who had just given them rejecting social feedback would show more anger than would those
rejected by same-race evaluators. Even though the omnibus interaction was just short of
significant, because we had a priori predictions regarding this effect, we tested the Participant
× Evaluator race interaction, which was significant, F(1, 103) = 6.02, p < .05. Among Black
participants, those rejected by White evaluators were perceived as appearing angrier than were
those rejected by Black evaluators, F(1, 103) = 4.57, p < .04. Similarly, among White
participants, those rejected by Black evaluators appeared angrier than did those rejected by
White evaluators, F(1, 103) = 4.04, p < .05. Again, the effects within different-race settings
appeared to be symmetrical in that White participants rejected by Black partners were rated as
exhibiting similar levels of external negative emotions (M = 1.6, SD = 0.8) as Black participants
rejected by White partners (M = 1.7, SD = 0.8; F < 1).
Among those who received social acceptance feedback, we hypothesized that Black
participants might be uncertain of or suspicious of social acceptance from White evaluators,
resulting in increased vigilance. We tested this hypothesis by examining our behavioral
measure of vigilance—how often participants monitored their partner during the cooperative
task. We observed a significant two-way interaction, F(1, 98) = 4.55, p < .05. Among Black
participants, the evaluator’s race resulted in a significant effect, F(1, 98) = 4.74, p < .05. Black
participants interacting with White evaluators monitored them more during the task than Black
participants interacting with Black evaluators. Among White participants, the race of the
evaluator was not significant (F < 1). Planned contrasts comparing the intergroup pairings
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

yielded a significant effect as well, F(1, 105) = 4.17, p < .05. Black participants paired with
White evaluators monitored them more often (M = 3.1, SD = 2.5) than did White participants
paired with Black evaluators (M = 1.6, SD = 1.2).
We also hypothesized that positive emotion would be greater following social acceptance from
a same-race partner than following social acceptance from a different-race partner. Analysis
of coders’ ratings of how much positive emotion the participants exhibited during the
cooperative task revealed a significant Participant × Evaluator race interaction, F(1, 103) =
4.56, p < .05. As predicted, among Black participants, those paired with a same-race evaluator
displayed more positive emotion than did those assigned to a different-race evaluator, F(1,
103) = 11.06, p < .002. The simple effects test was not significant among White participants.
Similar to the other measures, Black participants positively evaluated by White partners were
rated as expressing less positive emotion (M = 1.5, SD = 0.3) than White participants positively
evaluated by Black evaluators (M = 2.0, SD = 0.5), F(1, 105) = 5.85, p < .05.
Differentiating CV Activational Responses: Positive Emotions Versus Anger

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We observed two meta-conditions that resulted in CV reactivity consistent with activational
patterns—social acceptance from same-race partners and social rejection from different-race
partners.2 However, we expected these two conditions to engender very different emotions.
Specifically, we expected social acceptance from same-race partners to engender positive
emotions (pride, confidence), and we expected social rejection from different-race partners to
engender anger. We found initial confirmation for these predictions with behavioral
observation and, to a lesser extent, self-reported emotions.
We then turned to our predictions regarding differentiating anger from positive emotions using
cardiac variables, specifically, VC and HR reactivity. We predicted that anger would yield
larger cardiac responses than would positive emotions; hence, we expected that VC and HR
changes would be higher in the rejection/different-race conditions than in the acceptance/samerace conditions. An ANOVA revealed significant differences in VC (averaged across the task)
between conditions in the direction hypothesized, F(1, 54) = 4.34, p < .04. Participants rejected
by different-race partners exhibited greater VC (M = 17.15, SD = 10.3) than did those who
received positive feedback from same-race partners (M = 11.5, SD = 10.0). The same analysis
performed on HR changes revealed significant differences between conditions in the predicted
direction as well, F(1, 55) = 8.31, p < .006. Again, the discrimination condition resulted in
greater increases in HR (M = 11.73, SD = 8.8) than did social acceptance by a same-race partner
(M = 5.69, SD = 6.8).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Finally, we examined correlations between cardiac variables (VC and HR) and observed
emotions. We predicted that VC responses would be related to greater anger, but only in
conditions in which anger was evoked—the rejection/different-race conditions. Consistent
with these predictions, VC changes were positively and significantly related to expressed anger
(average r = .53, p < .01) as were HR changes (average r = .36, p < .05). In the same-race and
positive feedback conditions, these relationships were not observed (for VC and expressed
anger, average r = −.07, ns; for HR, average r = −.23, ns). Furthermore, we expected that
positive emotions would be related to a dampening of CV responses (see Fredrickson,
Mancuso, Branigan, & Tugade, 2000). The results for this effect were weaker but were in the
predicted direction. In the same-race and positive feedback condition, less VC was related to
greater observer-rated positive emotion (r = −.31, p < .052). HR changes were also negatively

2We also examined the cardiac differences between positive emotion and anger, using the additional condition: White participants paired
with Black evaluators who received positive feedback. The results are similar to what is reported above, however this particular condition
was not included in the main analyses because the grouping was post hoc. Furthermore, the imbalance in the within cell ns provides
misleading conclusions regarding the relationships between cardiac reactivity and emotions.
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

related to positive emotion following positive feedback, but the relationship was weak (r = −.
19, ns). These analyses show some support for the idea that VC and HR responses tend to
increase as the intensity of anger increases.
Ancillary Analyses
To explore possible mechanisms of the performance effects observed, we examined
relationships between CV reactivity and performance. Consistent with the idea that threat
responses impair cognitive performance, we observed that the greater the CV threat pattern,
the fewer words participants found (for CO, r = .31, p < .007; for TPR, r = −.22, p < .03). As
expected, VC and HR did not predict performance. These relationships lend support to the
argument that threat reactivity is part of the profile of physiological responses that may be
associated with performance decrements and may operate in stereotype threat situations
(Blascovich, Spencer, Quinn, & Steele, 2001) as well as other threatening or distressing
situations.

Discussion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We predicted that social rejection and social acceptance would be interpreted and experienced
differently in intraracial versus interracial encounters. Rejection in an interracial context led
to more activational CV reactivity, better performance, and more self-reported and nonverbal
displays of anger. For most of the findings, the effects were symmetrical in that Whites’
responses to rejection by a Black evaluator were similar to Blacks’ responses to rejection by
a White evaluator. However, it is important to note that the interaction for attributions to
discrimination were primarily a result of Black participants perceiving rejecting feedback as
more likely being due to discrimination when evaluated by White partners compared with
Black partners, whereas White participants did not significantly rate rejecting feedback as
being more due to discrimination based on the evaluator’s race. Black participants might have
been more likely to claim discrimination, given the same circumstances, than White
participants because of exposure to past discrimination or because of the historical and cultural
milieu in which they reside (Crocker & Major, 1989). Contrary to expectations, we did not
find that intragroup rejection would bring about more self-reported or observed internal
negative emotions than would intergroup rejection, though performance and CV responses did
suggest more impairment and inhibitional responses following intraracial social rejection.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In contrast, receiving positive feedback from a same-race partner resulted in more activational
physiological responses, better performance, and more positive emotion than did receiving
positive feedback from a different-race partner. These latter effects were asymmetrical,
however, with the interaction driven primarily by Black participants. In comparison with White
participants positively evaluated by a Black partner, Black participants positively evaluated by
White partners exhibited CV responses consistent with threat, performed less well, and showed
less positive emotion and more vigilance during the cooperative task.
Implications and Extensions for Attributional Ambiguity Theory
The current research extends prior work on attributional ambiguity in a number of ways. Most
important, it shows how attributional ambiguity is manifested physiologically and
behaviorally, as well as emotionally, in ongoing interracial interactions. In addition, it
demonstrates the important point that rejection in intergroup encounters results in similar
patterns of responses for members of majority groups (Whites) as it does for members of
minority groups (Blacks). Members of both groups appeared angered by social rejection
feedback when it came from a different-race evaluator rather than from a same-race evaluator.
This symmetrical pattern illustrates that rejection that is perceived as unjust and perceived as
possibly due to discrimination might engender anger responses, regardless of race of the target.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Third, it demonstrates that the attributional ambiguity stemming from receiving positive
feedback from a majority group member in a context in which expression of prejudice against
minorities is strongly discouraged can, ironically, engender threat and impair performance
among minorities.
Past work on the consequences of attributional ambiguity has focused primarily on implications
for self-esteem (e.g., Crocker et al., 1991; Major et al., 2003) and has shown that conditions
that lead to the highest rates of attributions to discrimination are also most likely to buffer selfesteem from rejection. Additionally, in early attributional ambiguity theory, it was argued that
buffered self-esteem following negative feedback might stem from a deflection of self-blame
to other blame, thus protecting the self. Thus, we argued that deflecting blame for rejection
from self to other would result in more anger responses as well as activational physiological
responses. However, it is possible that buffered self-esteem was a defensive response that
masked underlying distress, which is similar to the idea of repressive coping. In this case, we
would likely have observed less self-reported distress coupled with greater physiological threat
responses. In contrast, we observed strong activational responses. Therefore, we believe these
data extend earlier attributional ambiguity work by demonstrating that situations in which
discrimination is a plausible attribution can result in activational motivational responses rather
than in threat or disengagement.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Crocker et al. (1991) also found that Black participants reported a less negative mood than did
White participants, following rejection by a White partner. Their measure of negative mood,
however, combined internal (e.g., sad, depressed, discontent, gloomy) and external (e.g., angry,
mad, vindictive) moods. In distinguishing external from internal negative emotions, we
predicted and observed specific emotional reactions following intraracial rejection that differed
from interracial rejection (discrimination). Thus, the extensions to attributional ambiguity
theory offered in the present study do not simply provide measurement advances (physiological
and nonverbal measures) or design advances (examining majority and minority groups) but
also provide clarification of the motivational and emotional responses underlying
attributionally ambiguous situations.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This research also extends attributional ambiguity theory by demonstrating how positive
feedback in intergroup encounters can be attributionally ambiguous for members of minority
groups but can be less so for majority groups. Black participants’ responded favorably to social
acceptance from a partner of their own race but negatively to social acceptance from a White
partner. White participants, in contrast, responded relatively favorably to social acceptance
from both White and Black partners. It is important to note that the partners were blind to
feedback condition, thus the asymmetrical responses cannot be due to White partners behaving
differently in the social acceptance condition than in the rejection condition.
What accounts for this asymmetry? We believe that Blacks experience social acceptance from
Whites as attributionally ambiguous (Major, 2005). Strong social norms have emerged in the
United States that discourage the display of prejudice by Whites against Blacks, especially on
college campuses. Whites report being motivated to behave in an unprejudiced way for external
as well as internal reasons (Plant & Devine, 1998), respond in a more prejudiced way on implicit
than on explicit measures of prejudicial attitudes (Dovidio, Kawakami, Johnson, & Howard,
1997), and even show a positive bias in their evaluations of Blacks (Harber, 1998; Mendes et
al., 2002; Vanman, Paul, Ito, & Miller, 1997). As a result, we find it unsurprising that Black
participants may come to doubt the sincerity of positive feedback from White peers, especially
when such feedback appears to be based on limited information. The inability to trust feedback
or accurately gauge another’s feelings is, in turn, likely to engender uncertainty. This can be
aversive and threatening (e.g., Mendes et al., 2007) and can interfere with accurate knowledge
of one’s abilities (Aronson & Inzlicht, 2004). Thus, positive feedback from Whites to Blacks

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 16

may have an ironic and unintended negative impact, particularly if the positive regard is
perceived as disingenuous.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Because our study was designed, in part, to examine effects of attributions of discrimination,
we acknowledge that there are methodological factors that might have influenced our results.
In our study, we asked participants to rate attributions that might account for the feedback they
received. In explicitly engaging the attributional process, we were, in effect, priming
participants to think about discrimination as a plausible reason for rejection. Without these
primes, we would expect that individuals who chronically expect or anticipate discrimination
would respond similarly to our participants here; however, it is not clear that those who do not
hold chronic prejudice expectations would have thought of discrimination as a likely cause for
the feedback; instead, they might have been threatened by rejection, regardless of the intergroup
context. In addition, it is important to recognize other theories that could account for our
findings. For example, system justification theory (e.g., Jost, Banaji, & Nosek, 2004) might
have predicted that majority group members’ responses to rejection by a minority group
engendered anger, not because it was deemed discriminatory but rather because it violated the
hegemony believed to exist between different racial groups, specifically Whites believing they
have higher social status than do Blacks.
Extensions for the Biopsychosocial Model

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The current research advanced prior research and theory in psychophysiology by differentiating
positive emotions from anger within the same activational pattern of responses (see also
Herrald & Tomaka, 2002). We found that rejection from a different-race partner and social
acceptance from a same-race partner both resulted in an activational pattern of physiology
despite engendering different emotions. Thus, despite the apparent similarity of CV responses
in these two conditions, we argue that they can reflect very different underlying emotional
states because the motivational states are orthogonal to valence. We predicted that conditions
that evoked anger (e.g., rejection by an outgroup member) would engender greater sympathetic
activation than conditions that evoked challenge (e.g., acceptance by an ingroup member). As
expected, we found that cardiac changes were greater for the rejection/different-race conditions
than for the acceptance/same-race conditions and that the greater the expressed anger, the
greater the increase in ventricular contractility and HR.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In future research, it will be important to measure other CV responses that could possibly
differentiate positive emotions from anger. One such parameter is CV recovery, in which anger
should result in a much slower trajectory of cardiac recovery than would positive emotions. A
second parameter is an index of parasympathetic influence. Some recent evidence suggests
that anger may result in decreases in cardiac vagal reactivity (vagal withdrawal) (Demaree &
Everhart, 2004; Sloan et al., 2001), whereas positive emotions may result in increases in cardiac
vagal reactivity (Porges, 2003). Finally, it is important to note that the cardiac differences we
observed could simply reflect emotional intensity rather than emotional specificity.
Limitations
In this study, we examined White and Black participants in early adulthood who were all
students at a 4-year university. This sample limits generalizability, when we consider how
discrimination affects those of lower SES, limited education, and older age. Though this
limitation is not trivial and does circumscribe the conclusions, it can also be construed as an
advantage to this research because, on average, the participants were currently exposed to
similar environmental influences. The younger sample also meant that there were fewer
baseline physiological differences between the two groups. We did, however, observe baseline
differences in VC. This difference could be due to underlying biology, anxiety associated with
participating in an experiment, or even early signs of vulnerability to hypertension because of

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 17

cumulative effects of discrimination. Though even after controlling for these baseline
differences, we still observed effects of interracial encounters on stress reactivity.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Future Directions: Implications for Pathways of Discrimination to Health

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This study provided evidence that responses to actions perceived to be discriminatory resulted
in more activational CV responses and anger, whereas rejection that could not easily be
attributed to external causes (e.g., evaluator’s bias) was more likely to result in threat responses.
This provides a fertile framework regarding linking patterns of physiological responses to
possible health outcomes. Racial disparities are large, with Blacks at least 2 times more likely
to be hypertensive than are Whites. Furthermore, disparities in coronary heart disease are
increasing (National Center for Health Statistics, 2003; Willems, Saunders, Hunt, & Schorling,
1997). One explanation for racial disparities in health is that perceived discrimination
engenders physiological stress responses that are harmful to health (Clark et al., 1999). In this
research, rejection from different-race partners, compared with rejection from same-race
partners, was more likely to be attributed to discrimination and was associated with increased
anger; this rejection also led to a larger cardiac response. Several lines of evidence suggest that
physiological responses associated with anger, such as increased cardiac responses, are
associated with the development of hypertension and are directly or indirectly linked to
coronary heart disease (Anderson, McNeily, & Myers, 1991; Matthews, Salomon, Brady, &
Allen, 2003; see Matthews, 2005, for a review). Repeated anger expression has been found to
be linked to coronary heart disease via physiological processes that can compromise the CV
system (atherosclerosis and hypertension) or can bring about acute events that can initiate
critical diseases (e.g., stroke and myocardial infarction; see Leventhal & Patrick-Miller,
2000; Smith, 2006). So, even though, in the short term, anger may deflect self-blame, protect
self-esteem, and result in collective action, when anger is repeatedly experienced, it may create
excessive wear and tear on CV functioning. Blacks are more likely than are Whites to perceive
and/or experience discrimination and, to the extent that they respond with anger and have
increased cardiac reactivity, this may partly explain why Blacks are at increased health risk.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Threat or inhibitional responses may have harmful effects on health as well. Though still
speculative, threat responses may make one more vulnerable to immune- and age-related
diseases (Irwin, Daniels, Smith, Bloom, & Weiner, 1987; Leventhal & Patrick-Miller, 2000).
Research has identified links between negative internal emotions such as sadness, depression,
and anxiety and diseases such as cancer, reduced immunological functioning, and hypertension
(S. Cohen & Herbert, 1996; Irwin et al., 1987; Kiecolt-Glaser, McGuire, Robles, & Glaser,
2002). These links suggest the provocative hypothesis that social rejection that is internally
attributed might be associated with one pathway to disease, whereas discrimination and
hostility might be associated with a different pathway. Future research should focus on these
distinct pathways and the emotional and psychological states associated with them.

Acknowledgements
The research was supported by National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Grant RO1 HL079383 awarded to Wendy
Berry Mendes and Brenda Major. We are grateful to our dedicated confederates and research assistants at University
of California, Santa Barbara and at Harvard University for their assistance in conducting the experiments, scoring the
physiological data, and coding behavior.

References
Anderson NB, McNeily M, Myers H. Autonomic reactivity and hypertension in Blacks: A review and
proposed model. Ethnic Disparities 1991;1:154–170.
Aronson J, Inzlicht M. The ups and downs of attributional ambiguity: Stereotype vulnerability and the
academic self-knowledge of African American college students. Psychological Science 2004;15:829–
836. [PubMed: 15563328]
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ayduk O, Mischel W, Downey G. Attentional mechanisms linking rejection to hostile reactivity: The
role of ‘hot’ versus ‘cool’ focus. Psychological Science 2002;13:443–448. [PubMed: 12219811]
Barger SD, Marsland AL, Bachen EA, Manuck SB. Repressive coping and blood measures of disease
risk: Lipids and endocrine and immunological responses to laboratory stressor. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology 2000;30:1619–1638.
Baumeister RF, Leary MR. The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental
human motivation. Psychological Bulletin 1995;117:497–529. [PubMed: 7777651]
Blascovich, J.; Mendes, WB. Challenge and threat appraisals: The role of affective cues. In: Forgas, J.,
editor. Feeling and thinking: The role of affect in social cognition. Paris: Cambridge University Press;
2000. p. 59-82.
Blascovich J, Mendes WB, Hunter SB, Lickel B, Kowai-Bell N. Perceiver threat in social interactions
with stigmatized others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2001;80:253–267. [PubMed:
11220444]
Blascovich J, Spencer S, Quinn D, Steele C. African Americans and high blood pressure: The role of
stereotype threat. Psychological Science 2001;12:225–229. [PubMed: 11437305]
Blascovich J, Tomaka J. The biopsychosocial model of arousal regulation. Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology 1996;28:1–51.
Brownley, KA.; Hurwitz, BE.; Schneiderman, N. Cardiovascular psychophysiology. In: Cacioppo, JT.;
Tassinary, LG.; Bernston, GG., editors. Handbook of psychophysiology. 2. New York: Cambridge
University Press; 2000. p. 224-264.
Bullock SC, Houston E. Perceptions of racism by Black medical students attending White medical
schools. Journal of the National Medical Association 1987;79:601–608. [PubMed: 3612829]
Cacioppo, JT.; Bernston, GG.; Larsen, JT.; Poehlmann, KM.; Ito, TA. The psychophysiology of emotion.
In: Lewis, M.; Haviland-Jones, JM., editors. Handbook of emotion. 2. New York: Guilford Press;
2000. p. 173-191.
Cacioppo JT, Hawkley LC, Bernston GG. The anatomy of loneliness. Current directions in psychological
science 2003;12:71–74.
Cheney D, Seyfarth R, Smuts B. Social relationships and social cognition in nonhuman primates. Science
1986 December 12;234:1361–1366. [PubMed: 3538419]
Clark R, Anderson NB, Clark VR, Williams DR. Racism as a stressor for African Americans: A
biopsychosocial model. American Psychologist 1999;54:805–816. [PubMed: 10540593]
Cohen GL, Steele CM, Ross LD. The mentor’s dilemma: Providing critical feedback across the racial
divide. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 1999;25:1302–1318.
Cohen S, Herbert TB. Health psychology: Psychological factors and physical disease from the perspective
of human psychoneuroimmunology. Annual Review of Psychology 1996;47:113–142.
Crocker J, Cornwell B, Major B. The stigma of overweight: Affective consequences of attributional
ambiguity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1993;64:60–70. [PubMed: 8421252]
Crocker J, Major B. Social stigma and self-esteem: The self-protective properties of stigma. Psychological
Review 1989;96:608–630.
Crocker J, Voelkl K, Testa M, Major B. Social stigma: The affective consequences of attributional
ambiguity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1991;60:218–228.
Demaree HA, Everhart DE. Healthy high-hostiles: Reduced parasympathetic activity and decreased
sympathovagal flexibility during negative emotional processing. Personality and Individual
Differences 2004;36:457–469.
Dickerson S, Gruenewald TL, Kemeny ME. When the social self is threatened: Shame, physiology, and
health. Journal of Personality 2004;72:1191–1216. [PubMed: 15509281]
Dovidio JF, Kawakami K, Johnson B, Howard A. On the nature of prejudice: Automatic and controlled
processes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 1997;33:510–540.
Eisenberger NI, Lieberman MD, Williams KD. Does rejection hurt? An fMRI study of social exclusion.
Science 2003 October 10;302:290–292. [PubMed: 14551436]
Feldman Barrett L. Valence is a building block of emotional life. Journal of Research in Personality
2006;40:35–55.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fredrickson BL, Mancuso RA, Branigan C, Tugade MM. The undoing effect of positive emotions.
Motivation and Emotion 2000;24:237–258.
Harber KD. Feedback to minorities: Evidence of a positive bias. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 1998;74:622–628. [PubMed: 9523409]
Harmon-Jones E, Allen JB. Anger and frontal brain activity: EEG asymmetry consistent with approach
motivation despite negative affective valence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1998;74:1310–1316. [PubMed: 9599445]
Herrald M, Tomaka J. Patterns of emotion-specific appraisal, coping, and cardiovascular reactivity during
an ongoing emotional episode. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2002;83:434–450.
[PubMed: 12150239]
Ickes W. Compositions in Black and White: Determinants of interaction in interracial dyads. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 1984;47:330–341.
Irwin M, Daniels M, Smith TL, Bloom E, Weiner H. Impaired natural killer cell activity during
bereavement. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 1987;1:98–104.
Jost JT, Banaji MR, Nosek BA. A decade of system justification theory: Accumulated evidence of
conscious and unconscious bolstering of the status quo. Political Psychology 2004;25:881–920.
Kaiser CR, Miller CT. Stop complaining! The social costs of making attributions to discrimination.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 2001;27:254–263.
Kelsey RM, Guethlein W. An evaluation of the ensemble averaged impedance cardiogram.
Psychophysiology 1990;27:24–33. [PubMed: 2339185]
Kiecolt-Glaser JK, McGuire L, Robles TF, Glaser R. Psychoneuroimmunology influences on immune
function and health. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 2002;70:537–547. [PubMed:
12090368]
Leary MR, Gallagher B, Fors E, Buttermore N, Baldwin E, Kennedy K, Mills A. The invalidity of
disclaimers about the effects of social feedback on self-esteem. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 2003;29:623–636. [PubMed: 15272995]
Levenson RW, Ekman P, Friesen WV. Voluntary facial action generates emotion specific autonomic
nervous system activity. Psychophysiology 1990;27:363–384. [PubMed: 2236440]
Leventhal, H.; Patrick-Miller, L. Emotions and physical illness: Causes and indicators of vulnerability.
In: Lewis, M.; Haviland-Jones, JM., editors. Handbook of emotion. 2. New York: Guilford Press;
2000. p. 523-537.
Major, B. New perspectives on stigma and psychological well-being. In: Levin, S.; van Laar, C., editors.
Stigma and group inequality: Social psychological perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 2005.
Major B, Quinton WJ, McCoy SK. Antecedents and consequences of attributions to discrimination:
Theoretical and empirical advances. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 2002;34:251–330.
Major B, Quinton WJ, Schmader T. Attributions to discrimination and self-esteem: Impact of group
identification and situational ambiguity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 2003;39:220–
231.
Matthews KA. Psychological perspectives on the development of coronary heart disease. American
Psychologist 2005;60:783–796. [PubMed: 16351405]
Matthews KA, Salomon K, Brady SS, Allen MT. Cardiovascular reactivity to stress predicts blood
pressure rise in adolescence. Psychosomatic Medicine 2003;65:410–415. [PubMed: 12764214]
Mendes WB, Blascovich J, Hunter S, Lickel B, Jost JT. Threatened by the unexpected: Physiological
responses during social interactions with expectancy-violating partners. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 2007;92:698–716. [PubMed: 17469953]
Mendes WB, Blascovich J, Lickel B, Hunter S. Challenge and threat during social interactions with White
and Black men. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 2002;28:939–952.
National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States. Hyatts-ville, MD: Author; 2003.
Plant A, Devine P. Internal and external motivation to respond without prejudice. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 1998;75:811–832.
Porges SW. The polyvagal theory: Phylogenetic contributions to social behavior. Physiology & Behavior
2003;79:503–513. [PubMed: 12954445]

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Richeson JA, Shelton JN. When prejudice does not pay: Effects of interracial contact on executive
function. Psychological Science 2003;14:287–290. [PubMed: 12741756]
Richeson JA, Trawalter S, Shelton JN. African Americans’ implicit racial attitudes and the depletion of
executive function after interracial interactions. Social Cognition 2005;23:336–352.
Sherwood A, Allen MT, Fahrenberg J, Kelsey RM, Lovallo WR, van Dooren LJP. Methodological
guidelines for impedance cardiography. Psychophysiology 1990;27:1–23. [PubMed: 2187214]
Sinha R, Lovallo WR, Parsons OA. Cardiovascular differentiation of emotions. Psychosomatic Medicine
1992;54:422–435. [PubMed: 1502284]
Sloan RP, Bagiella E, Shapiro PA, Kuhl JP, Chernikhva D, Berg J, Myers MM. Hostility, gender, and
cardiac autonomic control. Psychosomatic Medicine 2001;63:434–440. [PubMed: 11382270]
Smith TW. Personality as risk and resilience in physical health. Current Directions in Psychological
Science 2006;15:227–231.
Stephan WG, Stephan CW. Intergroup anxiety. Journal of Social Issues 1985;41:157–175.
Stephan, WG.; Stephan, CW. An integrated threat theory of prejudice. In: Oskamp, S., editor. Reducing
prejudice and discrimination. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 2000.
Stroud LR, Tanofsky-Kraff M, Wilfley DE, Salovey P. The Yale Interpersonal Stressor (YIPS): Affective,
physiological, and behavioral responses to a novel interpersonal rejection paradigm. Annals of
Behavioral Medicine 2000;22:204–213. [PubMed: 11126465]
Vanman EJ, Paul BY, Ito TA, Miller N. The modern face of prejudice and structural features that moderate
the effect of cooperation on affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1997;73:941–959.
[PubMed: 9364754]
Vorauer JD, Turpie CA. Disruptive effects of vigilance on dominant group members’ treatment of
outgroup members: Choking versus shining under pressure. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 2004;87:384–399. [PubMed: 15382987]
Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A. Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative
affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1988;54:1063–1070.
[PubMed: 3397865]
Weinberger DA, Schwartz GE, Davidson RJ. Low-anxious, high-anxious, and repressive coping styles:
Psychometric patterns and behavioral and physiological responses to stress. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology 1979;88:369–380. [PubMed: 479459]
Willems JP, Saunders JT, Hunt DE, Schorling JB. Prevalence of coronary heart disease risk factors among
rural Blacks: A community-based study. Southern Medicine Journal 1997;90:814–820.
Williams, K. Ostracism: The power of silence. New York: Guilford Press; 2001.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The up arrows refer to increases, the down arrows refer to decreases, and the side-to-side arrow
refers to no change. The less than symbols indicate that the adjacent measures are relatively
different from each other. CV = cardiovascular; CO = cardiac output; VC = ventricular
contractility; TPR = total peripheral resistance; HR = heart rate.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

Cardiovascular reactivity from the first minute of the cooperative task following rejection, by
participant’s race and evaluator’s race. The error bars indicate the standard error of the means.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

Mendes et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

Cardiovascular reactivity from the first minute of the cooperative task following social
acceptance, by participant’s race and evaluator’s race. The error bars indicate the standard error
of the means.

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Table 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
0.52
0.06
5.05*
0.62
0.70
0.21
5.62*
1.08
0.86
0.01
0.60

2.74
2.59
2.18
102.3
2.42
67817
22.0
3.78
0.41
0.32
0.31

0.26
0.21
0.39
3.63

0.17
3.80
1.72
1.56
0.02
1.08
0.02
1.30

0.85
1.14
1.66
0.06
3.11
0.21
1.96
0.58

2.80
1.22
1.53
0.17

0.03
0.43
1.22

31.66***
1.54
7.72**

1.11
0.12
1.09

1.58

29.59***

6.76*

P×FF
test

F F test

E Race F
test

0.58
0.00
0.19
1.59

0.40
0.09
1.85
1.01

0.16
0.24
0.04

0.56

E×FF
test

0.97
2.85
1.34
0.66

1.18
0.59
0.80
0.09

0.65
0.17
0.69

3.11

P×EF
test

.09
.07
.03
.11

.20
.14
.18
.30

.26
.03
.13

.31

r

1, 98
1, 103
1, 103
1, 103

1, 102
1, 102
1, 102
1, 108

1, 110
1, 110
1, 110

1, 110

df

P×E×F

3.96*
3.10
0.07
4.91*

2.31
8.13**
15.02***
8.26**

4.58**
0.31
0.00

7.35**

F test

p < .001.

p < .01.

***

**

p < .05.

*

Analyses shown for performance were conducted controlling for past experience with similar types of word games.

All analyses with VC were conducted controlling for baseline VC.

b

a

Note. N = 118. The degrees of freedom (df) for the three-way interactions were the same as that for the other main effects and interactions. ANOVAs = analyses of variance; MSE 3 mean square error;
P = participant; E = evaluator; roman F = feedback; CV = cardiovascular; VC = ventricular contractility; CO = cardiac output; TPR = total peripheral resistance.

0.81

0.64

Attributions to discrimination
Emotion and motivation
 External negative
 Internal negative
 Positive
CV reactivity
 VCa
 CO
 TPR
Performanceb
Behavioral observation
 Vigilance
 External negative
 Internal negative
 Positive

P Race F
test

MSE

Dependent variable

2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Summary of Effects From ANOVAs Testing the Participant’s Race × Evaluator’s Race × Feedback
Mendes et al.
Page 24

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Table 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
−0.7 (1.8)
0.5 (1.4)
0.8 (1.7)
15.8 (8.0)
1.1 (1.3)
−202.3 (216)
13.2 (4.5)
1.5 (1.4)
1.7 (0.8)
1.2 (0.3)
1.9 (0.7)

−1.4 (1.9)
0.8 (2.0)
0.7 (1.7)
8.8 (10.4)
0.5 (2.1)
37.9 (274)
10.5 (4.9)
1.9 (2.6)
1.2 (0.4)
1.5 (0.5)
1.8 (0.6)

1.8 (1.8)
1.6 (0.8)
1.5 (0.9)
1.9 (0.6)

19.4 (11.4)
1.5 (2.1)
−161.1 (342)
15.9 (5.6)

−0.4 (1.4)
0.4 (2.0)
0.1 (1.6)

2.5 (0.87)

Black
evaluator

2.1 (2.4)
1.20 (0.4)
1.5 (0.8)
1.7 (0.5)

15.9 (12)
−0.09 (1.2)
74.3 (169)
13.2 (2.7)

−1.5 (2.0)
0.3 (1.2)
0.7 (1.2)

2.3 (0.84)

White
evaluator

White participant

−2.4 (1.8)
−0.1 (1.8)
1.8 (1.1)

4.20*
0.01
0.32

0.49
6.02*
0.80
0.97

1.5 (1.5)
1.3 (0.7)
1.6 (0.6)
2.2 (0.6)

14.7 (14.4)
0.8 (1.1)
−97.4 (201)
14.1 (6.1)

1.7 (0.9)

9.71**

3.55†
6.43*
11.18**
3.92*

Black
evaluator

P×E

3.1 (2.5)
1.4 (0.8)
1.5 (0.9)
1.5 (0.3)

13.5 (9.5)
−0.5 (1.0)
184.8 (417)
9.9 (4.8)

−3.3 (1.2)
0.2 (1.3)
1.8 (1.2)

1.8 (0.7)

White
evaluator

Black participant

1.6 (1.2)
1.2 (0.4)
1.3 (0.3)
2.0 (0.5)

12.2 (9.6)
0.7 (1.7)
−33.2 (177)
13.7 (5.9)

−2.6 (1.6)
0.3 (1.3)
0.6 (1.5)

1.2 (0.4)

Black
evaluator

0.9 (0.9)
1.2 (0.6)
1.4 (0.6)
2.0 (0.6)

12.7 (8.7)
0.7 (1.2)
−48.6 (131)
14.0 (6.4)

−2.6 (1.4)
0.04 (1.6)
1.1 (1.6)

1.6 (0.7)

White
evaluator

White participant

p < .01.

p < .05.

**

*

†
p < .10.

VC reactivity included VC baseline as a covariate because of race differences observed at baseline.

a

Note. The standard deviations are in parentheses. P = participant; E = evaluator; CV = cardiovascular; VC = ventricular contractility; CO = cardiac output; TPR = total peripheral resistance.

2.9 (0.98)

1.8 (0.87)

Attributions to discrimination
Emotion and motivation
 External negative
 Internal negative
 Positive
CV Reactivity
 VCa
 CO
 TPR
 Performance
Behavioral observation
 Vigilance
 External negative
 Internal negative
 Positive

White
evaluator

Black
evaluator

Dependent
variable

Black participant

Rejection feedback

Acceptance feedback

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Summary of Means, Standard Deviations, and Effects From Primary Dependent Variables

4.55*
0.02
1.19
4.55*

0.17
3.11†
4.52*
3.99*

0.92
0.48
0.37

0.47

P×E

Mendes et al.
Page 25

J Pers Soc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2008 September 15.

